Extinction of experience due to climate change
Masashi Soga & Kevin J. Gaston 
Nature Climate Change volume 14, pages108–110 (2024)Cite this article

921 Accesses

27 Altmetric

Metricsdetails

Ongoing climate change has the potential to reduce people’s direct experiences with nature, leading to or further exacerbating the ‘extinction of experience’. We argue that understanding these impacts is crucial, as the extinction of experience can have adverse consequences for both humans and the natural environment.

Anthropogenic climate change is a major threat to global biodiversity, with the potential to lead to the extinction of many thousands of species1 and the loss of local populations and reduction in abundance of many more. While scholarly and policy debates continue to focus on the scale, distribution and rapidity of these impacts, there is another, often overlooked, extinction event emerging — the ‘extinction of experience’2. This is the progressive loss of direct, sensory interactions that people have with nature (hereafter their ‘personalized ecologies’)3, a trend that is becoming more apparent, particularly with regard to children2. Similar to the extinction of wild plants and animals, the extinction of experience can have a broad range of negative consequences for both humans and nature2. Individual people who do not engage directly with nature, or do so in only a very limited fashion, are likely to lose substantial benefits associated with their health and well-being, contributing to the phenomenon often referred to as ‘nature-deficit disorder’4. Furthermore, direct experiences of nature are recognized as one of the key drivers of people’s support for pro-nature policies and management actions3,4. Consequently, the extinction of experience is increasingly seen as a major public health concern and a fundamental obstacle to mitigating global environmental degradation2,3.

Extinction of experience and climate change
Climate change alters the condition, behaviour and distribution patterns of both humans and nature. These combined shifts can lead to an impoverishment of personalized ecologies by diminishing people’s capability, opportunity and motivation to experience nature4 (Figs. 1 and 2). Most obviously, changes in the abundance and distribution of nature, particularly in urban areas but also beyond, alter the opportunities that people have to experience it, whether during other activities or more purposefully (for example, changing abundance and distribution of habitats and species that people benefit from, or are desirous of, encountering). However, these opportunities are also shaped by the levels and timings of activity of organisms (for example, flowering, daily movements, migration) and by those of people (for example, local daily activities and movements, commuting to school or work, long-distance excursions), all of which are often sensitive to climatic conditions5 (Fig. 2a). People’s motivation to interact with nature can also be strongly shaped by climate, through its influences on the comfort and risk associated with the environmental conditions that they will experience in so doing (for example, temperature, rainfall, humidity, wind; Fig. 2b–d) 6,7,8, on the state of nature (for example, decline and loss of familiar or iconic plants and animals), and on the well-being issues that will arise (for example, changes in distribution and abundance of disease vectors, and organisms that do humans harm). Furthermore, people’s capability to interact with nature is likely to be influenced by climate change, particularly given increasing evidence that exposure to ambient heat can elevate the prevalence and severity of various physical and psychological health issues9.

Fig. 1: A conceptual framework for understanding how climate change could increase extinction of experience.
figure 1
Climate change involves changes in the condition, behaviour and distribution of both humans and nature, which can diminish people’s capability, opportunity and motivation to experience nature. There are likely to be several feedback loops in which declines in personalized ecologies induced by climate change can lead to further extinction of experience (dotted arrows).

Full size image
Fig. 2: Empirical evidence suggesting declines in personalized ecologies due to climate change.
figure 2
a, Changes in seasonal overlap between park visitors and wildflower displays at Mount Rainier National Park, USA, driven by changes in the date of snow disappearance5. b, Deviations in the number of visitors to three mountainous national parks in the United States (Yosemite National Park, Sequoia and Kings Canyon national parks, and Lassen Volcanic National Park) during extreme drought and wet years compared with normal years8. c, Percentage of individuals participating in walking in Friedenspark, Germany, based on ambient temperature classes6. d, Differences in the frequency of green space visits among migrants on normal and hot days in Vienna, Austria7.

Full size image
Unsurprisingly, there are likely to be complex interactions and feedbacks between the effects of climate change on people’s capability, opportunity and motivation to experience nature, and the consequences (Fig. 1). For example, reduced daily engagement with nature is known to lead to a diminished interest in visiting natural environments3, as well as a deterioration in physical and psychological well-being4. Moreover, the lower levels of pro-environmental attitudes and behaviours among individuals experiencing a decrease in nature experiences include actions necessary to address climate change, such as energy conservation and reduced meat consumption4.

In addition, climate change can add to, and potentially act synergistically with, other threats to personalized ecologies, in much the same way as species extinction often results from the combined effects of climate change and other anthropogenic factors. For instance, limitations imposed on children’s home ranges due to social restrictions (such as heightened concerns by parents and schoolteachers about the safety of outdoor play) are a key factor restricting children’s interactions with nature10, but these constraints are expected to be exacerbated by increasing concerns about risks associated with heat-induced health issues, including heat exhaustion and heatstroke (to which children can be particularly vulnerable).

Timings and scope of impact
The extent of past and future extinction of experience due to climate change will vary both spatially and temporally. As this extinction is a combined outcome of the climate responses of both humans and nature, these patterns, and hence the hotspots, may not necessarily always be easy to predict. Nonetheless, any commonalities in the two sets of responses seem likely to be especially important. For instance, extremely high daytime temperatures can lead to shifts of animal activity into the nighttime and local extinctions that will reduce the opportunities for people to have nature interactions11, but those interactions are also likely to be profoundly reduced by people changing the duration and timing of their own outdoor activity (for example, shifting daytime activities to nighttime)12; constraints on human sensory systems at night restrict the extent to which changes in timing of human activity will enrich personalized ecologies. Likewise, in cooler regions, increasing temperatures may both motivate people to engage in outdoor activities13 and expand the range of wildlife species, potentially leading to increased personalized ecologies.

The extent of people’s extinction of experience in response to climate change will also vary with their socioeconomic circumstances, although personalized ecologies seem commonly already to have become quite poor. For instance, individuals with lower incomes often live in areas characterized by harsh environmental conditions and high natural disaster risks, making them more susceptible to decreased opportunities for nature interactions due to climate change14. Similarly, changes in environmental conditions, and hence the opportunities to access nature, resulting from climate change might have a more major impact on vulnerable groups, including children, older individuals, those with disabilities, and refugees and migrants7 (Fig. 2d). Considering the health and well-being benefits associated with personalized ecologies4, this socioeconomic bias in future extinction of experience has the potential to impact social equality and environmental justice15.

Mitigation measures
Aside from directly limiting climate change itself, there are several possible interventions to limit its effects on the extinction of experience. Arguably, the most straightforward approach would be preserving and increasing people’s opportunities to experience nature. A readily implementable approach involves ensuring access to green spaces designed to alleviate high temperatures, achieved through the construction of paths and shelters (Fig. 3a). Indeed, green spaces with ample shaded areas often facilitate outdoor activities even during warm summer days6. Furthermore, the protection of local flora and fauna is crucial for preserving people’s opportunities for nature experiences. In this context, common species, which are often less sensitive to climate change than rare ones, would have a key role (Fig. 3b); changes in their abundance are likely to substantially influence individuals’ personalized ecologies.

Fig. 3: Examples of strategies to alleviate the adverse effects of climate change on personalized ecologies.
figure 3
a, Constructing shelters in urban parks. b, Safeguarding common species. c, Disseminating information to help individuals identify wild animals. d, Managing green spaces to reduce the risk of encountering animals that can harm humans. Credits: a, iStock.com/Chimperil59; b, iStock.com/seaskylab; c, Masashi Soga; d, iStock.com/Remigiusz Gora.

Full size image
Alongside increasing opportunities, it is important to enhance people’s capability and motivation to engage in nature experiences4. This can be facilitated through various recreational and educational programmes. For example, providing individuals with tools and information to recognize and identify organisms colonizing areas affected by climate change can boost both their ability and inclination directly to encounter these organisms (Fig. 3c). Similarly, fostering excitement about the emergence of new wild plant and animal communities due to climate change could also increase motivation to interact with nature. Furthermore, managing green spaces to minimize the risk of encountering potentially harmful organisms (for example, mosquitoes, snakes) can contribute to alleviating people’s concerns about the safety of outdoor play (Fig. 3d).

Of course, similar to other climate change adaptation strategies, the successful implementation of the aforementioned mitigation measures relies on the active engagement and collaboration of a diverse array of stakeholders, including urban planners, green-space managers, public health experts, educators, local communities and researchers. Extinction of experience is not currently acknowledged as a focal point in climate change discussions. Nevertheless, considering its broad implications (affecting not only human health and well-being but also shaping the future of biodiversity)3,4, it should be integrated as a crucial component requiring attention within existing climate change adaptation strategies.