There is much consternation today about the words "cult" and
"occult", and what they mean. Many are worried that their own
organizations, groups, or religions may fall into this category. Since the
word "occult" merely refers to "secret" or "hidden", it is used by doctors
to describe unknown bacteria as being "occult". As for a religion,
philosophy, organization or other group activity, it is a "cult" if it utilizes
"secret teachings", made known only to a select few initiates or "priests".
Is it possible that an entire area of physics has been declared
virtually "occult" and "off-limits" to the public or to private individuals,
by a powerful group, so that all science education or data generally
available to the public has been "screened" to eliminate references to it?
Is it possible that the actual science involved in "electro-propulsion", has
heen replaced with a "bogus science", which has been promoted and
promulgated to the extent that no one except the 'esoteric elite' knows the
truth? And if so, has the "occult" science become the exclusive province
of a very few specially selected corporate/government "priests"?
I began studying this controversy—including the science involved—
when I was but a child of eight years, in 1946, after interviewing oil field
pumpers who had seen silvery "flying disks" in the remote oil fields in the
west Texas and southern New Mexico desert. At the age of 13, I spent a
couple of days visiting with family friends and their neighbor,
astrophysicist Dr. Lincoln La Paz, in Albuquerque, New Mexico. La Paz
was then employed by the U.S. government to help cover up Nazi flying
saucer technology brought to New Mexico after WWII. My early
convictions were later corroborated when I acquired a piece of hardware
from a 1943 German flying saucer at Sandia Base where La Paz worked.
Since the truth about electropropulsion is based on "ether" (A.K.A.
"aether") physics, which has been collected, hidden away, or declared
"national security secrets", or intentionally obliterated by false
propaganda which is so intense that the general public remains unaware
of the facts which are right under their noses, I have dubbed the ether
physics ultimately connected to electro-propulsion, "Occult Ether
Physics". This book is dedicated to the rediscovery of, examination of, and
the integration of these secrets into the public knowledge.
The high priests of this occult knowledge are the elite owners of the
coercive monopolist corporate banking, industrial, mineral and related
interests, who in turn allow the initiation of certain scientists, military and

government officials into their secret teachings only insofar as it is
necessary, to execute and maintain a conspiracy of giant proportions, so
that the technology can be classified as a "state secret" which can be
controlled and enforced by means of unconstitutional "national security
laws", military and civilian legal authority, and police. These measures are
intended to protect the archaic technology and resources controlled by the
elite, from the competition of a truly free market society.
Because of the last 76 or more years of progressively intensifying false
propaganda and manipulation of knowledge and science, a majority of
scientists ridicule the concepts of the existence of an ether and of flying
saucers, as if such thinking belonged in the category of a "flat earth"
theory and the "little green men" from outer space babblings, but the
reverse is true. The proponents of Relativism and the Big Bang (the "Big
Bangers") want you to believe that the universe is finite, so that, if you go
"too far", you will "fall off the universe", rather than off a "flat earth".
What's the difference? Flat earth...finite universe...they're both dumb
theories.
And what do the "little green men" lies have to do with exclusively
man-made electric flying machines, and technology based on sound and
well-established electrical science and physics, but which, like the existence
of the ether, has been tucked away in secret vaults, to keep you from using
it, while you are being fed false and useless "theories"? These range from
"curved space", "time travel", "Big Bang", and "alien abduction" stories,
to "parallel universe", "interdimensional travel", and any other
outrageously incredible stories, concocted by government spooks, national

security personnel, and secret agents in the "UFOlogy" and "pseudo-
debunker" communities ("pseudo-debunkers" in my vernacular, are

official government spokesmen or scientific know-it-alls whose job it is to
completely deny the existence of flying saucers, or to ridicule their other
covert government counterparts, the UFOlogists, new-agers, or
paranormalists).
Before you decide there is no ether, or no flying saucers, or before
you believe the often-told "prime-time" lies that aliens are "here", or that
time-travel is possible, you should ask yourself whether or not your
thinking on these subjects has been conditioned by Big Brother's Biggest
Lies. If you believe in relativism, I should point out that "time- travel" is
an integral part of that, which is a very incredible impossibility which

makes the so-called "science" you rely on a worthless piece of pseudo-
intellectual crap concocted by someone who wanted to sabotage your mind

2

on behalf of the self-appointed high priests of "Occult Ether Physics".
Is your thinking a barometer of thought-control mediocrity? Are you
so out of control of your own metaphysical concepts and epistemology,
that you have to get your thinking from the "canned goods" section of
NASA (NAZIA), courtesy of the CIA's Office of Scientific Intelligence
("OSI")? Is your education a TV dinner, prepared by a Secret
Government, so you'll never discover the real food for thought?
For those of you who may be unfamiliar with my more complete
exposition of the whys, wherefores, whos, and other facts concerning the
huge volume of false propaganda designed and disseminated on behalf of
the coercive monopolist corporate state, to conceal flying saucer
electropropulsion and other advanced and "free energy" technology, you
should read my prior book, Space Aliens From the Pentagon, copyright
Wm. R Lyne, 1993, ISBN 0-9637467-0-7; 1995 2nd ed., ISBN 0-9637467-
1-5; 1999 3rd revised ed., ISBN 0-9637467-7-4.
The flying saucer is a product of Nikola Tesla's life work, his most
fundamentally important invention, for which all his other inventions
were in pursuit of, though you probably have never heard this fact from
anyone else. How do I know? I have documented it in many years of
research, tracing Tesla's developments and his own words uttered and
published during his lifetime, in scattered, sparse yet sufficient sources, as
he placed a crowning achievement on top the work of the world's greatest
scientific minds of the nineteenth century, who were Tesla's inspirations.
It was supposedly proved, on May 29, 1919, "...that we live in a
curved four-dimensional space-time". Albert Einstein said a massive body
spinning in space "...would drag space and time around with it...", the
origin of so-called "frame-dragging" and "space curvature". "Gravity is
no longer a mysterious force acting at a distance but the result of an object
trying to travel in a straight line through space curved by the presence of
material bodies" (Gary Taubes, Relativists in Orbit, Discover, March,
1997).
Even such theories...Relativistic bromides interlaced with such

phrases as "the 'fabric' of 'space-time'", "space curvature", and "frame-
dragging", although off-the-wall flaky, suggest the existence of an ether,

albeit an erroneous concept of the ether.
Since 1919, Nikola Tesla's electropropulsive discoveries have been
concealed by government suppression, theft, and ridicule, while "science"
has become a pseudo-scientific mathematical shell-game which bears little
new fruit, and less resemblance to reality. It is time for the truth.

INTRODUCTION: NIKOLA TESLA'S ORIGINAL 1875 PLAN
Tesla's original vision, in his 1870's student days, of his "ideal flying
machine", was of an electropulsive one, the realization of which is why he
said he originally entered the field of electrical science in 1875 in the first
place. This was the problem which he had assigned to himself as his main
lifelong work. (Frank Parker Stockbridge, The Tesla Turbine. The World's
Work, march, 1912, pp. 543-48.)
Originally anticipating that the electrical power needs for an
electropropulsive craft would be too great for an on-board power plant
(since his ship was to be devoid of sustaining planes), he initially
embarked on developing his "wireless transmission of power" system, so
as to transmit the anticipated power needed from ground-based power
generators and stations. Some of these earlier Tesla ideas turned out to be
unnecessary for his flying machine, so he turned them for intended
commercial purposes. Since his conception of the ether was of a relatively
low-density one, and his conception of the electromagnetic force not nearly
so much stronger than the gravitational one, his later discovery that his
prior anticipation of greater electrical power needs than actually required,
led to changes in his electropropulsive craft, and produced plenty of
surplus "spin-off' technology.
During the 1920's, at a time when he was in great need of money to
complete his electropropulsive ship, he unsuccessfully attempted to
interest the U.S. government in some of this surplus "spin off' technology.
In an unpublished article prepared but never published, Tesla said: "...we
should push the development of flying machines and wireless transmission
of energy without an instant's delay and with all the power and resources
of the nation". The immediate association here is between "flying
machines" (not "aeroplanes") and "wireless transmission of energy". Tesla
had piles of patents which produced him no money, because the Morgans
and Rockefellers had declared them off limits. No one could borrow money
from the banks to put one of these systems into practice, and anyone who
was foolish enough to do so on their own money could expect the wrath of
the gods to come down on them like lightening bolts from Zeus.
Due to his imminent discovery that his on-board power needs would
not be so great, and a failure to interest anyone in the development of his
wireless energy transmission system, Tesla obtained a patent in 1913 on
a remarkable turbine he had invented about 1909. This was probably in
view of encouraging developments and awareness which showed that the

electromagnetic interaction is 1040 times stronger than the gravitational
interaction (George Gamow, Gravity, Anchor Books, N.Y. [1962], p. 138).
According to Hendrick Lorenz, the electrical attractive force is 2 x 1039
times stronger than the gravitational attractive force.
The change in Tesla's strategy seems to have occurred between his
1915 test of an electropropulsive missile using wireless energy projected
to it by a power beam from the ground, and his 1934 birthday
announcement. These new developments were probably spurred on by the
mother of invention, since without a wireless energy system, the prior
conception would be rather useless. The power monopolists could fight
that off forever, so Tesla was left to his own devices, unable to count on
anyone else.
The earlier misconceptions were still somewhat in Tesla's mind when
he developed the turbine commercially under the Tesla Propulsion
Company slogan, "20 Horsepower Per Pound", with the undisclosed
intention of also using the turbine to drive one of his specially designed
high frequency alternators to power the ship. After having developed such
a light and powerful turbine, which could turn upwards of 30,000 rpm.,
with a twenty pound unit producing over 200 brake horsepower on
gasoline, he also designed and received a patent in 1928 for a new kind of
"VTOL"-type propellor-driven airplane, to be powered by two turbines
mounted in tandem, which would counteract the torque of the prop, and
eliminate the need for the stabilizing props that helicoptors have on their

back fuselages. This aircraft, if built, would have had a superior weight-
to-horsepower ratio—perhaps three-to-one—and would have been very

fast in level flight, taking off vertically.
Tesla, on seeing the innefficient use of heavier aircraft engines then
in use, and the requirements of more cumbersome aircraft with greater
wing area, apparently wished to commercialize on the turbine by
designing and patenting the new airplane, which specifically used his
turbine, to raise needed capital to complete his more expensive
electropropulsive project. In his experiences with prior patents, he had
learned that a patent would be worthless unless he could get the needed
capital to carry the project out before the patent period expired, and that
the disclosure in a patent would allow others to do so only 17 years after
a patent might be granted to him, during which time his invention could
languish for lack of funding on his part, because the monolithic financial
interests were set against him.

While in the initial stages of development, Tesla seemed quite
unaware of the true power of "the force", until his early field tests of 1915
proved that it was "tremendous". In the years 1893 and 1894, Tesla had
"completely worked out" his Dynamic Theory of Gravity, that is, at least
in "theory". Inherent to that theory, was his electropropulsion system, yet
in the formative and theoretical stages. To publish his theory however,
would have been tantamount to disclosing the basic technology as well,
which would have allowed his competitors with the money and resources,
to complete and take credit for the most important work of Tesla's life,
and the greatest invention of mankind. Tesla lacked the necessary money,
and could not raise it. He could not protect himself by patent, until he
completed and tested a working model of large enough scale to impress the
aircraft industry and the government. Fatefully, it was during this time of
greatest financial need, when he still had the physical stamina to carry the
project out, that he was run ragged by bill collections and foreclosures, at
the behest of J.P. Morgan and his cohorts, all with the intent of crushing
Tesla because he kept coming up with new electric power systems which
made his prior systems obsolete. Since the systems would have ruined
Morgan and Rockefeller, and since any invention which Tesla marketed
for great profit would have allowed him the resources to build his energy
systems, he had to be crushed. Tesla never seemed to fully realize that
Morgan's pseudo-philantropism was nothing more than a scheme to
compromise Tesla's contract with himself, and a way of falsely inducing
Tesla's reliance on others rather than on his own self-reliance. This
treatment set Tesla back emotionally as well as financially and technically,
and reduced him at one point to a heap of groveling nerves, literally
begging Morgan to make good on his promises, to no avail, but like all
truly tragic figures, there was a peripides—a reassertion of the tragic
hero's excellent and untarnished Arturian powers—before he passed
heroically into the oblivion of death, as his discoveries, like the sword
Excalibur, sank beneath the waters of the lake of'national security' lies,
to the inurement of corporate greed, coercion and extortion.
The only power that Tesla seemed to have left, was that of
withholding his discoveries from the world, to protect his secrets from the
pilfering paws of the looters, unless he could receive the compensation and
credit which he deserved, but that didn't matter, because they got it all
before his corpse was cool, and never paid him so much as a dime for his
trouble.
After becoming aware of the true power of "the force"—one hundred

billion thousand trillion thousand trillion times stronger than gravity—
Tesla began to pursue the idea of an "on-board" power system for a
manned craft to be used for transportation, with his "wireless
transmission of power" to be relegated to a robotic, remote controlled,
electropropulsive "missile", for use in warfare, with electric power to be
transmitted to missiles from the ground. After a long period of silence
following his field testing of a working model of the electrically propelled
missile in 1915, Tesla began referring to the propelling force as
"tremendous" in his later announcements which began in the '30's.
"Tremendous" does not mean something which reacts feebly, to barely get
off the ground, but to something which rises with great and astounding
force, such as the way I saw a flying saucer perform in 1953...only ten
years after Tesla's death. If "tremendous" meant something like an
airplane or conventional rocket—as the CIA/NASA misinformationists
have idiotically attempted to misconstrue—then what would be the word
to describe a force which propels a flying saucer at 9,000 mph in three
seconds?
The words "means of propulsion", used by Tesla in his 1940
interview with William L. Laurence of the New York Times, are of the
utmost importance for those interested in understanding both the
misinformational conspiracy, as well as the scanty documentation of

Tesla's concealed discoveries. In their context, these words denoted an on-
board electropropulsive means to be used on his "ideal" flying machine,

either manned or unmanned, controlled "mechanically" by a pilot on
board, or "remotely by wireless energy" by a controller from the ground.
It did not refer to a "projectile" such as a "pellet" or "bullet", which had
no "propulsion system", and was merely "repelled" by a gun of some sort,
and it did not refer to any kind of "airplane"—hence "flying machine"—
since his machine was to have no wings, ailerons, propellors, or outer
appurtenances of any kind. "Propulsion" here means an on-board system
for perpetuation of motion, by electromagnetic means, supplied with
electrical power by either on-board generator, or by electrical energy and
control signals transmitted by power beam from the ground. The idea of
interplanetary travel appealed to Tesla, with the idea that, so long as the
electrical energy for propulsion could be transmitted from the earth, a
space ship would require no fuel tanks.
In a letter to his friend and financial supporter B.A. Behrend in the
1930's, Tesla referred cryptically to his electropropulsive discovery:
"What I shall accomplish by that other invention I came specially to see

you about, I do not dare to tell you. This is stated in all seriousness." Tesla
apparently was inferring a plan to discover "other worlds" in outer space
with his electrical machines.
Tesla realized that all solid bodies contain "electrical content", and
that they behave as resonant cavities, which interact electromagnetically
with rapidly varying electrostatic forces and ether to determine their
gravitational interactions and movements in space. These theories were
tested and confirmed to some degree in his 1899 Colorado Springs
experiments. The U.S. government never gave Tesla the time of day, and
his great electropropulsive discovery slipped into the eager hands of the
Nazi elite, when Wernher von Braun acquired and began development of
the "p2" project at Los Alamos, New Mexico in 1936, taking the project
back to Germany in the fall of 1937, where it was developed at
Peenemunde in the Baltic, until these secrets and others were traded to
American corporations and the U.S. government in exchange, under
Operation Paperclip, just after the armistice, for amnesty for many war
criminals, along with an agreement for several thousand people to work
for the U.S. government and American corporations. Anyone having
important technical information was protected.
The REAL Cover-up
Ever since Tesla's saucer discovery came under the control of the
U.S. government in 1945, there has been in effect a false propaganda
program—originally developed by the RSHA Amt VI
(Reichsicherheithaupt Amt VI—which translates to "National Security
Agency Division 6"—the organization within the Gestapo which was
invested with the highest secrets of the German Reich, and which
controlled in Nazi Germany the equivalent to our own UFOlogy, new age,
and pseudo-sceptic misinformation dissemination network). The
government simply employed the whole Nazi saucer counterintelligence
apparatus, and it was some of the original Nazi misinformationists,
employed at Holloman A.F.B., New Mexico, who designed and
implemented the 1947 "Roswell Hoax". Though shadowed with ostensible
military and "national security" vestiges, this cover-up has been
protracted on behalf of a coercive monopolist corporate state, even since
the acquisition of the secrets by the Nazis in 1936, for if the technology
had gotten even into the hands of private Germans at that time, the Nazi
state's days would have been ever much more so shortly numbered.

8

Can you imagine the effect of this kind of transportation in private
hands? It would allow the common man to go everywhere in the world, to
visit all the places which he cannot presently even afford the airline fare
to. Yet a small, privately-owned flying saucer would cost less than an
automobile to build, would use practically no fuel, would travel thousands
of miles per hour, would last a long time, and would require practically no
maintenance.
Can you imagine the effect it would have on totalitarian communist,
fascist, or corporate state governments and 'favored' economic interests?
Can you see the bottom drop out of the candy-assed real estate market,
when it suddenly became possible to live anywhere, even places where
there were no roads? Can you see the problems along the borders of
countries, when saucers fly across and back without checking through
"customs"? The main problems, as you can see, are with the paranoid and
criminal fears of power crazy authorities, who would suddenly lose a lot
of the power necessary for them to keep their "jobs", protecting and
maintaining the interests of the coercive elite.
These considerations are the ones which indicate the perpetrators of
any "cover-up". There is much talk on TV programs, radio talk shows,
newspapers, books, magazines, and videos about a "...cover-up of our
government doing business with the aliens for fifty years". If you can see
it on prime-time TV every night of the week, the only "cover-up" which
can be presumed, is one which is opposite to the one they pretend to be
telling you about. Such programs are the cover-up. The volume of these
lies is so great that it is almost incredible, considering the fact that they
are evidence of our own government covertly acting behind the scenes to
lie to us. Whenever government is involved in broadcasting such trashy
BIG LIES to every household in America, it is good cause to ask, "What
else are they lying to us about?"
This book, along with my prior one, is dedicated to the objective of
bringing this secret technological and socio-economic dictatorship to an
end.

CHAPTER I: THE OCCULT ETHER THEORY AND

ELECTROPULSION

The theory which I espouse in this book is based on what can be
corroborated throughout the words and developments of Nikola Tesla
and their logically construed implications, in combination with other
special information linked to that, as presented here and in my prior
book, Space Aliens From the Pentagon. This theory is close to Tesla's
Dynamic Theory of Gravity, and I like to think that it even makes some
corrections that Tesla himself made or would have made, had he lived
long enough.
Like most theories, this theory is incomplete, may contain errors,
and will require further development, tests, corrections, and revisions,
either by myself of by others in the future. I have stated here my basic
thinking on the subject up to this time, which has progressed somewhat
since my prior book, using my own terminology involving "Omni
Matter" (A.K.A., "the Ether"). If you will notice in my title to this
chapter, I have already created another new word—"Electropulsion"—
to shorten the word "Electropropulsion".
Since this book is for the greatly uninformed public, as well as for
the researcher, I will make an effort to couch it in layman's terms—for
I am myself a layman—and will provide some illustrations where helpful,
to give a reasonable grasp of my concepts, rather than a "quantum
mechanical" mathematical orgy, which is usually combined with pages
of dull equations and numbers which proceed logically from the
contradictory and unproven illogical premises which are so prized by
that ilk. It is as if to say, "Hey! Look at me Ma, I can do lots of math!"
"Ether Physics", by its very nature and name, is subatomic physics,
which to me means "sub-protonic" and "sub-electronic". I am not so
concerned with sub-atomic nuclear particles per se, but rather with what
I believe are the finite building blocks of the proton and electron, which
exist within the ether in simpler form. I will leave all the quarks, muons,
mesons, leptons, etc., to the "Relativistic Quantum Mechanics" (hence,
"R.Q.M.s"), and their "elegant equations".
Characteristics of Basic Ether Particles
My basic ether particle is called the "Omni", which has a positive

nucleus—a "protette" called an "Omnion"—and a negative sub-
10

electron—an "electrette" called an "Omnitron". As you may have
noticed, this scheme is a scaled-down version of the basic hydrogen atom,
with its proton and electron. Like most atoms, the Omni is normally
neutral and in equilibrium, but is much smaller, being ultra-fine. Due to
its tiny size and neutrality, it can pass easily through "solid bodies"
(except the solid bodies are actually passing by and through it), yet it
behaves like a solid in respect to high frequency electromagnetic
radiation of specific range, from the infra-red through the visible light
frequencies, which disturb its equilibrium, yet, though we can feel it, it
appears to be transparent and invisible to the naked eye.

Like hydrogen gas, there is some elasticity, due to the
compressibility of the magnetic fields, so it is an "elastic solid" as
Faraday said. Due to the tiny Omni size, so-called "empty space" is
actually packed almost solid with this very fine matter, which oscillates
at such high frequencies—well beyond that of x-rays—yet the tiny size
and normal neutrality allows it to penetrate "solid mass"—which is
mostly "space"(which is also saturated with Omni which must be moved
through by a mass to make room for more Omni).
Since interstellar 'space' is equivalent to a vacuum containing little
gaseous matter—such as a Lenard tube in which charges easily move—
the Omni in interstellar space is highly conductive, with charges moving
freely from body to body, along magnetic lines of force.
Omni-packed space is also omnidirectionally interpenetrated by
ultra-fine radiation, which is normally in equilibrium, called "Zero Point
Radiation" ("ZPR"). This ZPR constantly "twangs" the electron clouds
of atomic matter, creating the illusion of "electron orbits", which are in
fact standing waves in the undulating layers of electronic clouds
surrounding atoms and molecules. Since the matter with which these
electron clouds are associated is in constant motion, the clouds are
currents, since a "charge carried around is a current". The driving force

behind the currents is the motion, which, so long as uniform, is "force-
free". Any lost momentum is 'made up' by the ZPR.

The Omni has an almost balanced charge-to-mass ratio ("1:1"), and
responds to both positive and negative impulses. Electrostatic generators
provide a good example of the electrical behavior of the Omni. At
sufficiently high voltages, the positive and negative dynamic sub-charges
are separated by magnetic fields and condensed to form electrons and
protons. There is some unknown underlying reason why these charges
are of specific magnitude, which is yet to be explained, but the quantum

11

theory practically admits that there are subdivisions of basic electrical
charges, and that electrons are not "indivisible". This the basic bone of
contention, since if electrons are divisible, Relativism must fall. The
"basic charge" which has been perceived as that of the electron, appears
to be time-related, since electrical current moves at the same speed as
light, therefore, the electron charge is probably the quantity of charge
accumulated from a discrete number of Omni over some discrete unit
of time, which reflects in turn the distance traveled through space of a
proton during that time, with the charges actually circulating between
the Omni and matter.
High voltage force—either in electrical discharges or in radiation—
is necessary to break the Omnion-Omnitron bond. The same principle
applies to electropulsion. Strong, high voltage, high frequency negative
pulses are necessary to penetrate the negative Omnitronic cloud barriers,
to react with the positive Omnions, to cause the "inertia resistance" of
the Omni to be "asserted", so as to access its mass to be pulled against,
to propel a space ship through Omni-packed space, using a microhelical
"screwing" force of rotating electromagnetic tubules around irrotational,
vacuous Omni cores. The tubules are the product of the rotation
imparted by magnetic flux to electrical currents, which are consolidated
by changes in momentum.
The great number of Omni per volume of space represents a much
greater density of positive matter than normal 'solid' mass possesses,
hence the Omni function as "virtually stationary anchors" which an
electropulsive craft can lock onto to propel itself through space. The
Omni 'anchors' are in fact dynamic relative to earth, with a relative
velocity of thousands of miles per hour which represents the ultimate
velocity of the earth through the ether at any given time. Since the
"accessing" electropulsive force, when in effect, is transmitted at near the
velocity of light however, the comparative difference in velocity between
the Omni and the earth is almost insignificant It is practically "as if the
earth is stationary relative to the ether, except for the effects of so-called
gravity. To an effect which travels at 186,000 miles per second, a body
traveling at about 20 miles per second is virtually "at rest".
The difference in density between liquid hydrogen and the Omni,
for example, is relative to the difference in size between the hydrogen
atom and the tiny Omni, as well as to the volume of space actually
occupied by the Omnion in relation to its Omnitron. It can be assumed
that a tiny Omnion, being a subdivision of the proton, has a much

12

greater density per unit of space, due to the relative lack of space
between the Omni, which assemble to form protons, much like the space
between bricks which is filled with mortar. This 'mortar' is probably
some of Tesla's "insulative fluid" which "wets" positive bodies and
•particles', as a "perfect fluid". Just as the magnitude of the electron
charge may be time-relative, the magnitude of the proton may be
likewise, being composed of a discrete number of Omnions accumulated
over a discrete period of time.
While the Omni is invisible to the eye—because its period of
vibration is beyond the visible frequencies—it is not imperceptible. As
we move, we can feel the Omni accelerating, decelerating, or changing
directions within our bodies. When running, we feel the resistance
("inertia") created within our body, to changes in momentum, as the
Omni tubules are forced in different directions or in accelerating or
decelerating pathways through the atoms and molecules of our body.
Once we reach a constant velocity, we can feel how the microhelices—
created by the constant-pitch spins of the Omnitrons—'bore' through
the Omni, creating the "momentum" which tends to carry us along in
level and straight lines. Once in constant velocity, we must supply only
whatever energy is lost through wind or mechanical friction, or erratic
movement, in order to maintain constant velocity. We can also see the
effects of the Omni in the behavior of everyday objects—the way they
resist changes in movement, fall, accelerate, gain momentum, tumble,
roll, collide, shatter, bounce, or come to rest. I analogize a solid mass to
a flock of geese, maintaining its "formation" ("shape"), as it flies through
the "air" ("Omni"):

The earth and everything on it is moving through ether-filled space,
at tremendous speed. In addition, the earth spins and orbits, which
gradually changes the microhelical patterns relative to the polarity of an
interpenetrating "etheric wind". The magnitude of the so-called "force
of gravity", measured from the center of mass of a body, is greater at sea
level than on top Mt. Everest, where the distance between its center and
that of the earth is greater, but this statement—based on Newton's law—
-fails to tell us "why" gravity exists, what forces create it, or why the
force varies "directly proportional to the masses, and inversely
proportional to the square of the distance between (the centers of the)
two bodies". Even Newton explicitly admitted that his laws failed to
address causes, and only claimed to mathematically describe effects.
"Electrical content" is inherent to all solid matter. Atoms contain
nuclei composed of positive protons and neutral neutrons, composed of
protons and electrons. Around these nuclei are negative "electrons". All
matter which contains electrostatic charges and is in motion, represent
"electric charges carried around", hence currents, which create magnetic
fields. Since magnetic fields impart rotation to electromagnetic fields,
this creates rotatory microhelical electromagnetic tubules within bodies,
around irrotational vacuous ether cores. These tubules are aligned by the
relative motion of a body, along the axis of a uniform or changing
movement, and create momentum by "boring through" the ether. Since
at any given time the pitch and diameter of a microhelix is constant, it
is not a "vortex", which involves a logarithmic spiral, either inward or
outward. Each time the velocity or direction changes, the microhelical
pitch and orientation resists, then adjusts to the new momentum.
The earth has a minimum negative surface charge of approximately
20 esu/cnr (20 electrostatic units per square centimeter). This is an
atmospheric phenomenon due in part to the ionizing effects of cosmic
radiation, but cannot be explained without reference to the velocity of
the earth through the Omni. The relatively non-conductive, insulative
and dielectric properties of the atmosphere play a part. Beneath the
earth's surface charge, the semi-conductive crust contains a vast ocean
of surplus electrons. The earth's surface charge is more or less a
constant, due to earth's surface area, varying somewhat by altitude due
to the changes in atmospheric pressure and moisture content of the air,
as well as the incidence of cosmic radiation and its frequencies.
All atoms—including hydrogen—possess net positive charge. This
is because the basic positive charge of a proton exceeds the magnitude

14

of the basic negative charge of an electron. Hydrogen, with its single
proton and single electron, has the highest charge-to-mass ratio and the
lowest gravity of all elements. As one moves up the periodic chart of
elements, progressively increasing in complexity above hydrogen,
elements possess progressively lower charge-to-mass ratios, since the
comparative ratios of electrons match the number of only the protons in
the nuclei. Since the neutrons are not negative, they add to the positive
mass relative to the electron, but contribute nothing to electrical charge,
and the ratio of neutrons increases up the chart. This leaves an excess
positive mass of the earth, the semi-conductive surface of which is
capable of receiving and maintaining a large negative charge surplus,
mostly brought to earth by the thousands of lightening bolts per second,
and retained due to the dielectric and insulative properties of the
atmosphere.
The constant electrical discharges from the atmosphere are driven
by the cosmic motion of the earth, which converts the electrostatic
charges to currents. This was confirmed by H.A. Rowland's experiment.

Since atmospheric gases are insulators, the mostly alkaline, semi-
conductive crust of the earth is largely an electron donor material, which

maintains a large reservoir of negative charges insulated by the
atmosphere. Cosmic rays striking the rarified light gases of the
ionosphere, maintain its positive charge. The effects of gravity also help,
since helium and hydrogen, both light, electropositive gases, gravitate to
the ionosphere. Between the ionosphere, c. 620 miles above, and the
earth's surface, there is a gradient of c. 150 volts/meter, totaling about
176 million volts, creating a considerable electric field, but the electric
field extends far beyond the ionosphere. This electric field creates
electrical displacement in the Omni within its reach, which is the cause
of gravity. The effects of the electric field on the Omni is almost
instantaneous, since near the speed of light, as the Omni pass from "free
space" into mass, where the gravitational force is exerted downward,
toward the source of the electric field.
There is no significant gravitational effect of earth's field above this
electric field. Since earth's magnetic field encompasses the moon, so does
the electric field. When a "sub-ion" (the Omni) is placed within an
electric field, the sub-negative charge (Omnitron) is attracted by the
positive pole (ionosphere) and repelled by the negative pole (earth). The
effect of these attractive/repulsive forces is to "displace" each Omni, and
to place the dielectric atmosphere and the Omni within a strain, so that,

15

near the earth, the Omnitronic clouds around each Omnion are forced
eccentrically upward, while the neutral zone would be over 300 miles
from earth.
The Cause of the Apparent "Inverse Square" Law of Gravity
As earth spins, the surface velocity— and atmospheric velocity with
it—at any point varies according to its distance from earth's center. An
object sitting at sea level moves through the Omni slower than a body on
top Mt Everest The voltage potential between the atmospheric gases at
higher altitude and the ionosphere is lower, but the voltage potential
between the atmosphere and the surface of Mt. Everest is higher.
Accordingly, for an object at sea level, the displacement of the
Omnitronic cloud is greater, due to the greater total electric field
strength. The increase in velocity offsets the increase in field effects on
the Omni so that the gravitational force is more or less equalized
between low and high altitude for objects on the earth, but the
gravitational effects decrease for airborne objects beyond the earth's
surface charges above Mt. Everest
The differences in these electrical potentials illustrates why there are
differences in relative displacement of the Omnitronic clouds, within
both earth's "gravity field", and within bodies moving within that field,
with a degree of displacement which is directly proportional to difference
in so-called "gravitational force" and the dielectric strain.
This comparison shows that a body at a higher altitude and velocity
has a lower gravity because the electric field has a lower displacing
influence on the Omnitronic cloudlets, and vice-versa. This is pertinent
to electropulsion, because we must diminish, reverse, magnify and
otherwise control this displacement in order to instantly synthesize and
control inertia, momentum, and "gravity". The displacement influences
the momentum because it affects the vibrating microhelical tubules and
the way they "bore" through etheric space. Since the electric field is
somewhat blocked out inside solid bodies, the tubules tend to drop to
concentric rotation, thus transferring a downward force to the mass of
which they are a part. "Gravity" is a product of the resistance to this
change in displacement. The reason why a moving sphere when charged
experiences an increase in its "virtual mass"—that is, an increase in the
work required to move it, but not in its gravity— is because the
"Faraday cage" effect of the increased charges tends to increase the

16

resistance to the movement of the Omni through the mass, affecting the
negative charges on the Omni.
Since the electric field and its displacing influence is altered by the
difference in dielectric constant within and without solid bodies, the
microhelical tubules tend to drop to concentric rotation, thus
transferring a downward force to the mass of which they are a part.
"Gravity" is a product of the resistance to this change in displacement.
Microhelical Tubes of Force
Due to the cosmic motion of earth, electrostatic, molecular charges
become currents, which create magnetic fields within ponderable bodies.
The currents and fields in atomic or molecular "domains" are unified by
momentum or magnetic fields. As a body moves through the ether/Omni
field with the earth, there is an "etheric wind" effect, which "blows
through" mass constantly from a regularly changing direction. Since
Omnitrons are "sub-electrons", they also resonate. As the electric
content forms pathways through the Omni within the body, the
resonant motions of the molecular currents form magnetic fields which
impart the microhelical rotation of the plane of polarization around
irrotational Omni cores. These microhelical "tubes" have "pitch" which
is determined by the rate of linear movement per second, in conjunction
with the diameters of their rotations (or "waves") at near the speed of
light. These tiny waves have spherical fronts, which can combine to form
larger spherical waves.
The microhelical tubes of electromagnetism, having pitch, function
like drills, tending to bore straight paths at a constant pitch and linear
velocity, around the irrotational vacuous Omni cores (consistent with
Newton's laws for inertia and momentum). Any change in direction or
velocity is met by a resistance ("inertia"). Since all mass is already in
motion, it always has momentum. The inertia exhibited by a body at rest
relative to earth, is really a product of its momentum, so this inertia is
really momentum. Inertia is therefore a resistance of a body to change
in its state of momentum. The two words are used in different ways, to
define "relative changes" in velocity and/or orientation.
Since the Omni near the spinning earth are subjected to the
stronger negative charges and the positive mass of the earth, the
Omnions are attracted downward, while the Omnitrons around them are
repelled upward, forming eccentric 'cloudlets'. For a body ("at rest") at

17

sea level, as the Omni enter its surface, the effects on the Omni of the
electric field of the earth is altered by the change in dielectric constant,
forcing the microhelical tubes in the mass to jump downward to a more
concentric rotation, since the density and rigidity of the Omni resists
such a change. Since the electromagnetic tubes are part of the mass, a
downward force is created by the downward pressure of the Omitrons,
which we call "gravity". The effect is similar to a water hose carrying a
high pressure stream of water. The helical force of the water creates a
gyroscopic stability and tends to straighten it out into a line, with a

regular precession. The "straightening" action is analogical to the so-
called "gravity force". This is true no matter which direction the solid

body is moving through the ether, because of the relative speed of the
electromagnetic interaction at virtually the speed of light, and the
polarity of earth's electric field.
Gravity, therefore, is the product of a body's reaction to the Omni's
resistance to a change in its momentum, transferred to a mass due to its
difference in dielectric constant, and its constantly changing movement,
orientation and velocity as it moves through universal etheric space.

In addition to the Omni Matter, all space is omnidirectionally
interpenetrated by ubiquitous Zero Point Radiation ("ZPR"), of
extremely high frequencies, power, and density. One scientist has
attributed so-called "blackbody radiation" to the ZPR (T.H. Boyer,
Derivation of Blackbody Radiation Spectrum Without Quantum
Assumptions, Phys. Rev. 182 [5], pp. 1374-83 [1969]). Boyer also found
that a nonlinear dipole can absorb energy from particular modes of the
ZPR spectrum (Random Electrodynamics: The theory of classical

electrodynamics with classical electromagnetic zero-point radiation, Phys.
Rev. D 11 [4], pp. 790-808 [1975]). Another scientist claimed to measure
the energy density of ZPR at 1094 gram/cm3

, for individual fluctuations
of random ZPR, on the scale of the Planck length (10 -33 cm.), by means
of a standard radiation detector, the frequency response of which was
specially altered to extend into the super high frequency spectrum
involved (J.A. Wheeler, Geometrodynamics, Academic Press, N.Y.
[1962]). In my last chapter, I detail the extraction of ZPR energy in the
atomic hydrogen process.
These particular researches of 1962 to 1975 are ex post facto, coming
long after Tesla's great discoveries. They merely re-confirm that, in
order for such intense, super high frequency radiation to pass through
space, it would require a space literally packed with an even finer ether,
consisting of dense, super high frequency, ultrafine bundles of positive
mass, surrounded by sub-electronic negative charges. This combination,
like the continously interlinked tetrahedronal silicon dioxide atoms
which make up solid quartz crystals, is capable of reacting to and
conducting electromagnetic radiation from the infinitely fine in
frequency, to the coarsest frequencies, simultaneously in all directions
("omnidirectionally"). This dense matter behaves as a solid to lower

frequency radiation between the x-ray spectrum down to the lower infra-
red, yet behaves as an all-pervading, interpenetrating and all-wetting

"perfect fluid", in respect to (the atomic content of) moving solid bodies,
the atomic structures of which contain so much room that they are
mostly "space".
Electropulsion utilizes externally projected IR-to visible frequency
radiation, of very high voltage, to cause the Omni to assert its "inertia
resistance", combined with low frequency internal waves to create the
(polarized) rotatory electromagnetic tubules, which instantaneously
synthesize momentum, by boring through the ether-filled space, to
propel a spacecraft through it.
An Old Wooden Box and a German Inertial Guidance System
In 1979, at a Santa Fe flea market, I examined an old wooden box
belonging to an elderly Pojoaque man who was employed as a workman
in 1937 at a secret project called "p2", which was run by Wernher von
Braun. The man had built the box to hold tools used in his job there. He
had carved, in "New Mexico folk style", a "map" showing the highways,

19

the location and name of the project, the symbol for the project (a
triangle with a dot in its center, which is a symbol for the Prussian
Illuminati of which von Braun was a member), and the date of the
project. Pojoaque—where the man lived—is prominently shown as a
large "P" with a zia sign around it. Below is my drawing of the old box:

The following weekend, in the spring of 1979, I went to an
Albuquerque salvage company—"King's Surplus City"—on east
Central, where I often bought military surplus things related to my
research and inventing, and was pleased to find a very unusual pile of
material all stacked in a separate little pile. On top the pile was a device
which I immediately recognized as a type of navigational "compass"
which would be required on the early flying saucers I had witnessed
during my back yard sleepouts in Kermit, Texas, between 1949-53,
which turned in increments of multiples of thirty degrees. The device
showed thirty-degree increments, and had 14 contacts—twelve for each
of the directions, and two for the six-volt motor which rotated the
compass ring—and the label showed it was manufactured in Nazi
Germany by Lizt on Oct. 1, 1943, in lot 127-178 (52 devices), for a
project named "KT-p2" ("Kreisel Teller - p2", which meant "Gyrating
Saucer - p2"). The device was called a "Peiltochterkompass" (a "polar
slave compass"), which was controlled by signals from a
"Meisterkreiselkompass" (a "master gyro-compass"), which means that
the device was half of an inertial guidance system.

The letters "p2", which designated the 1937 Los Alamos project run

by von Braun, were incorporated into the official secret name-
designation for the Nazi flying saucer project in 1943 Germany.

As explicitly detailed in Space Aliens, I saw the original reels of gun
camera films made during WWII over northern Germany, in 1957, later
in the afternoon of the same day that Major Donald Kehoe carried out
his hoax on national TV. Some of the films had been made by some of
the same men then present, since my Air Force Intelligence group was
attached to the original U.S. Army Eighth Air Force group which had
conducted those particular bombings in B-17 bombers. Those films
showed what were apparently manned "flying turtles"—small
electropulsive craft—which flew at high speeds around the bombers, in
order to draw fire and interfere with their missions.
In the spring of 1945, as the Russians closed in on Berlin, General
Photos of the device are shown below:

George Patton took a special armored group deep into Russian-encircled
territory, to the Nazi rocket center at Peenemunde on the Baltic.
Attached to this group, disguised as "tank commanders", were Army
intelligence officers specially vested with the task of retrieving all flying
saucer materials and/or destroying the same at the Peenemunde project,
along with retrieval of any technical drawings, etc. of strategic
importance at the project, before it could be captured by the Russians.
On discovering 200 celestial guidance systems (A.K.A., "inertial"
guidance systems) deep underground in a salt cave, General Patton was
infuriated on being ordered to destroy these systems by his superiors,
being unaware of the fact that the technical drawings and specifications
for the systems were already in American possession.
Development of the systems was imperative for the flying saucer,
since a magnetic compass would be worthless due to the "Faraday cage"
effect of the electric field surrounding the saucer, which would block out
the magnetic field of the earth. The master gyro was calibrated to true
north prior to takeoff, and would continue to hold that position during
flight, so that the "slave" compass would have that as a reference, in
order to actuate the six-volt motor and turn the geared compass heading
ring to reflect the correct direction of flight. This particular type of
Peiltochterkompass was used on a circular ship which could turn
peripherally—in 360 degrees, frontwards, sideways, backwards, etc., in
increments or multiples of 30 degrees—while other devices were used on
some of the latest types of German "V" ("Vergetungswaffen", or
"Revenge-weapons") rockets, which carried neutron bomb warheads,
and were fired from underwater from special small submarines which
were towed behind the latest "Electro-U-Boats" used in the final
"Stalemate" which I detailed in Space Aliens.
Subsequent to my purchase, security agents learned of my
possession of it and knowledge of what it was, so they went to Mark
King, son of the owner of King's Surplus City, and grilled him. He
showed them the bill of sale from Sandia Base, pursuant to his purchase
of the small pile of salvage from a Sandia Base employee who usually
brought salvage from that base to sell to him. As it turned out, the man
had stolen a pile of classified salvage and sold it for his own profit, using
a 'double-receipt' process intended to cover his tracks, but the security
people put the man under surveillance, caught him doing it again, and
charged, convicted and jailed him. They could not get the device back
from me, because I was an "innocent purchaser", and because it would

22

confirm the still-classified purpose of the device, in violation of security
procedures. I had purchased an inertial guidance system from a 1943
Nazi flying saucer, which has subsequently been brought to Sandia Base
in late 1945 under Operation Paperclip, along with what was later to be
over 116 flying saucer scientists and over 15,000 German personnel who
were brought to New Mexico, as part of a special secret "deal" which
was cut pursuant to the Stalemate.
As to the question of what "p2" meant scientifically, a similar
designation was used by Nikola Tesla to denote "potentials", "plates", or
"primaries". The drawing which follows is derived from information
contained in Tesla's 1890's lectures and excerpted on pages 70-73, and
provides the best clues I have found as to how Tesla created his "p2":

Both the D.C. 'brush' electrode and the A.C. 'compression'
electrode would draw the ether carriers through the mass of the ship and
its contents, creating the microhelical tubes which bored away around
the ether. The electrode on the left would be assisted by the special Tesla
bulbs, so that, when paired with the opposite A.C. electrode, it would

increase the pitch angle of the microhelices, accelerating the ether
through the mass and propelling the ship.
Low and High Frequency Electromagnetic Waves
And Tesla's Wireless Transmission of Energy
Low frequency electromagnetic waves can pass through solid
bodies, and tend to "hug the earth", while high frequency waves don't
penetrate solid bodies, causing a "skin effect" on them, and don't "hug
the earth", but tend rather to travel outward away from the earth in
straight lines. Nikola Tesla, in his Colorado Springs Experiments, was the
first person to investigate high voltage waves of high and low frequency,
and their terrestrial, atmospheric, and solid-body effects. The scope of
Tesla's Colorado Springs experiments were so far-reaching, that very
little or nothing was said in science journals about them, because they
left other scientists so dumbfounded that they were paralyzed by
miscomprehension.
Many of Tesla's tests in Colorado were related to electropulsion. A
long wave affects the internal mass of a space ship, "synthesizing
momentum", by invoking the rotatory motion of electromagnetism, to
create the drill-like electromagnetic microhelices ("tubes of force")
which "bore through" the ether as the mass moves. At the same time, a
higher frequency at the opposite end of the ship, opposite to the
direction of travel, causes the ether to be accelerated as it passes through
the mass of the ship and its contents, with an increased angle of pitch, so
the microhelical boring action propels the ship through space.
Low frequency waves also make it possible to project forceful
longitudinal electromagnetic pulses to a specific, distant point, by
sending the wave along a conductor or polarized atmospheric "carrier
beam" of U.V. or higher frequency radiation. The high voltage long
wave, carried directionally to a distant point by the carrier beam, can in
turn carry additional higher frequency waves superimposed on it, to
deliver the high frequency exciting energy, at the powerful long-wave
peaks. This was the basis for Tesla's "Transmission of Electrical Energy
Without Wires" inventions, as well as his "energy beam" and "death
ray" inventions, as the same system can be used for all three. The
manipulation of these wave characteristics is inextricably involved in
electropulsion, stimulated by Tesla's study of the works of 19th century
"ether physicists", and his own brilliant creative intuitions of the

24

rotating magnetic field, in Budapest Hungary, in 1882. This rotating
magnetic field discovery was involved in his electropulsion discovery,
because Tesla realized that the rotatory force of magnetic fields could be
used to synthesize the rotating "tubes of force", the naturally occurring
phenomena in solid bodies spoken of by Faraday and Maxwell and
known to Tesla, to propel a ship through space. The tubes had also been
discussed in 1881, by J.J. Thomson in England, but Thomson had never
related the tubes specifically to the ether until after Nikola Tesla had
connected the tubes to his intended electropulsion.
Tesla discovered that by using a low frequency beam-directed pulse,
he could cause, at the quarter wavelength, the eruption of a large
electromagnetic pulse which could, by carrying a much higher exciting
wave, excite the atmospheric gases in a region, to explosively expand
them, followed by a tremendous implosion and the absorption of a great
amount of heat in the area, causing immediate freezing. This process
would create an initial explosive shock wave followed by the implosive
return wave, similar to nuclear detonation. For example, by using a low
frequency of 60 cps, with a wavelength of 3,100 miles, directed by
carrier-beam, a pulse could be made to erupt at one-quarter wavelength-
—775 miles, corrected to 751 miles by velocity factor. By superimposing
an exciting frequency of say 50 megahertz or so, the atmospheric gases
could be excited to cause a "cold implosion" which absorbs heat. By
altering the wavelength and the direction of propagation, the results
could be delivered to any terrestrial point.
The Tesla ion bulb, fundamental to Tesla's "beams", is a solid
aluminum hemisphere, enclosed in a glass vacuum envelope, excited by
high voltage D.C. applied to the center of the hemispherical end. A
polarized beam is emitted normal to the flat face center. The frequency
is determined by the voltage. The ion beam polarizes, concentrates, and
guides a spherical, long wave front, amplified by Tesla's "extra coil", to
a distant target, which amplifies a higher frequency wave front
superimposed upon it, which will "ring" in-the target area at one-quarter
wavelength, in fact ring many times.
Outside the bulb, in close proximity to the beam, the high voltage
alternating current ("power wave") of low frequency, is emitted by a
ring-shaped electrode, and is directed along the beam's atmospherically
created conductive path, and is projected toward the distant target
where the one-quarter wave peak delivers it at its "point" of greatest
potential. This idea of Tesla's may have been stimulated by Maxwell's

25

concept that conductivity actually occurs in the dielectrics surrounding
a conductor, with the 'conductor' serving only to "guide" the current.
The June 30,1908 Siberian explosion/implosion at Tungushka, was
probably a risky test or inadvertent result of Tesla's giant Wardenclyffe
oscillator, and may have been a hidden reason as to why the project was
never completed. It should also be pointed out that this method involved
the absorption of energy "from the environment", since heat moves from
hot to cold. This was yet another great energy discovery. Tesla's method
"opened up" the atmosphere to this possibility, consistent with what he
said about nuclear energy coming from "the environment".
The Tungushka explosion may also have been the impetus for a
"very tempting offer" made to Tesla years before by V.I. Lenin,
mentioned in retrospect in a November 29,1934 letter from Tesla to J.P.
Morgan (microfilm, Library of Congress). The Lenin offer would have
been between 1917 and 1934, and was mentioned unsuccessfully in
attempt to tantalize Morgan). Tesla's "particle beam" weapon was
hinted at in the following illustration:

Tesla's TELEFORCE Discoveries
Tesla's Teleforce discoveries, evolved between 1900 and 1940,
consisted of a "new" way to produce rays in free air without a vacuum,
a "new" way to create a "very great electrical force", a "new" way of
"magnifying" the force, and a "new" means of electro-propulsion
(William L. Laurence, New York Times, Sept. 22,1940,11, p. 7). These
four "new" discoveries—all of which could work together—were actually
a juxtaposition of and different application of Tesla's devices already
tested separately in the Colorado Springs experiments or later in New
York or Wardenclyffe, with the exception that by 1915, he had tested the
electropulsive missile powered by beam-projected electrical energy, and
had tested a small, one-man electropulsive prototype in which he
ventured out his hotel window at night over New York City in
experimental test flights, and which served as an experimental basis for
a much larger and more ambitious set of space ships which he had
designed, which were repeatedly rejected by the U.S. government,
probably because they thought he was nuts.
Even the Nazis were skeptical that the Tesla electro-propulsive
technology might work, being unconvinced until Wernher von Braun
had actually tested the concepts at Los Alamos in 1936 and 1937, and
obtained the final approval of Hitler. Almost immediately after von
Braun's return to Germany in late 1937, construction was begun on

large "cigar-shaped" ships, using at first the iron pressure hulls of U-
boats, which were already equipped with a hermetically sealable system

carrying diesel generators for use in the atmosphere, and batteries for
use in outer space. With the huge difference between the strength of the
electromagnetic interaction and gravity, weight was apparently no
object.
Since Tesla had actually received offers from the Russians prior to
that time, I had considered the possibility that he had knowingly or
unknowingly cooperated somehow with the Nazis in their Los Alamos
experiments, through some of the unidentified laboratories he said he
was working with, which is a very real possibility.
In looking for a probable Nazi spy, there was one who had wormed
his way into Tesla's most intimate confidences, who was later convicted
and imprisoned for his espionage activities in America, but the exact
nature of his activities, other than the dissemination of Nazi propaganda,
was never specified in the public records. This connection was the most

27

probable explanation for how Tesla's electropulsive discoveries found
their way to the Nazi "p2" project, with all elements coinciding perfectly
in time. The fact that von Braun's pre-war New Mexico adventures have
been subsequently concealed from the public by the Secret Government,
a degree of secrecy which cannot be explained except by reference to the
Nazi flying saucer projects, is compelling.
The fact that I was a personal friend to an American rocket scientist
named Peter van Dresser, who was angered by Dr. Robert Goddard's
pre-war work with von Braun, and who was present in New Mexico
since the '20's and was intimately familiar with the 1930's liaisons to von
Braun's secret Los Alamos activities, left little remaining to be proven,
since there is no longer any security basis for concealing such liaisons, if
"rocket research" was the only thing von Braun's pre-war American
presence involved. He had already been appointed as the Peenemunde
project research leader, and had been promoted by Hitler and Himmler
to Ubersturmbannfuehrer in the SS, and was given a "leave of absence"
by Hitler to make the venture to America.
Dr. Robert Goddard, whose New Mexico laboratory was at
Mescalero, with his launch area at Eden Valley, near Roswell, far to the
south, was not involved in any known pre-WWH research at Los
Alamos, and probably knew nothing of von Braun's secret project there.
One of the most telling pieces of evidence regarding the intentional
misinterpretation of Tesla's discoveries—especially just after Tesla's
death in Jan., 1943, at which point all Tesla's papers and apparati fell
into the hands of the FBI—is the obvious meaning of the name for his
system—"TELEFORCE"—which means "force at a distance", in the
context of the four listed parts of the system to be used together, being
clearly applicable to flying saucer propulsion, once I pointed out the
fraud, and correctly interpreted the statement in 1993.
I have to hand it to the spooks, for doing such a good job of
concealing the connection between the flying saucer and the only man
who could have invented it—and whom the public should most readily
accept as the inventor who rightfully deserved the credit for it—even
though he never had a fair opportunity of giving his greatest discovery
to the world, for lack of money to build a working model of sufficiently
developed potential to impress us. The reason why he never had the
money was because of the secret "bill of attainder" placed on his name
by the greedy monopolists who were and still are afraid of technological
freedom and a truly free market of ideas, goods, and services.

28

CHAPTER II: EXPLORING THE NATURE OF THE ETHER
The Early Background
In 1997, after many years of research and thought regarding the
qualities of the ether, I decided to see what others had actually said,
before completing this book. Some of the material available to me was
second-hand information, being what someone said someone else had
said. I wanted to make sure these "repeated statements" were accurate.
After some difficulty, I accessed a copy of the classic, A History of the
Theories of the Aether and Electricity, by Sir Edmund Whittaker (1951
revised and enlarged second edition, Vols. I and II). The 1910 first
edition of this book was probably the most comprehensive book ever
published on ether theory as it existed in 1910, but the 1951 revision
merely clarified "acceptable" ether physics. The first edition was printed
in Scotland, under the title A History of the Theories of the Ether and
Electricity, front the age of Descartes to the close of the nineteenth century.
The second edition incorporated "new material" related to quantum
mechanics. Classical theory was in Vol. I, while Vols. II and III gave the
origins of relativity and quantum theory up to 1926. Neither the 1910
first edition nor the 1951 revision mentioned Tesla, but the chronological
sequence appeared to be "skewered' in the revised edition, with little or
no attempt to point out what the scientists were actually aiming at in
terms of electropulsion. Though information regarding Nikola Tesla was
omitted, there is much valuable related information.
In his preface, Whittaker stated that where space is now considered
"emptiness"—except for its property of propagating electromagnetic
waves—the development of quantum electrodynamics referred to a
vacuum with a new status as the location of 'zero point' oscillations of
the electromagnetic fields and zero point fluctuations of electric charge
and current, as well as a polarization conforming to that of a dielectric
constant, which is non-unity (i.e., which contains energy). This implies
awareness of the ZPR, but quantum theory inherently excludes the
possibility of "zero-point" fluctuations, since all such waves are always
regarded as possessing one-half "quantum".
Whittaker said that an alleged failure by ether theory proponents
to observe the earth's motion relative to the ether, caused the downfall
of the theory, but the facts show that the relativists, backed by corporate
publishing interests, hastily dug the grave and threw the dirt over the

29

corpse of ether theory while it was still alive, for the wrong reasons.
Much of the error was due to focusing on the weakest proponents who
believed that a portion of the ether is "carried along" by the earth, and
that an optical aberration would have to be observed at some point away
from the earth, in order for an ether to exist. It was asserted that the
failure of this observation was the "death" of "the" ether theory. By
advertising ether theory's weakest and most erroneous proponents and
ideas, the media made the RQM's hasty funeral of ether theory easy, and
paved the way for the gullible public's acceptance of relativism.
I concluded that Whittaker's 1951 edition intentionally skewered
important facts concerning electropulsion, which I have attempted to
straighten out for you in this book. I now feel more comfortable with my
version of Tesla's theory, than I did prior to reading Whittaker's book,
but that was only because I knew what I was looking for. The facts I
found are almost exactly as I said in my second edition of Space Aliens.
By reorganizing Whittaker's material into more proper order, I
discovered much "new" ("old") documentation, that 19th century
scientists were in pursuit of electropropulsion, and that there were
interesting similarities between the thinking of certain scientists of the
era and my own, which could eliminate some erroneous concepts about
what they actually said, and shows similarities to what I observed on
numerous occasions in the behavior of electropulsive "flying saucers",
since the "proof of the pudding" is when it flies across the dinner table.
It was my intent to examine known theory leading up to Tesla, to see
what he contributed to their discoveries, and to determine what
happened since that time to obscure, misinterpret and ultimately conceal
it. To this end, I present for you a brief history and documentation of
pertinent ether physics.
J.J. Thomson's "Electromagnetic Momentum"
Returning to the concept of the "carry-along" ether, Max Planck,
originator of quantum mechanics, conscribed to this form of ether theory
in part, saying that the ether had to be irrotational, carried along at the
same velocity as earth near its surface, and compressible and subject to
gravity like the atmosphere, in order for the theory to be true. At best,
Planck's beliefs showed a weak mechanical conceptualization,
something unexpected from one purportedly so adept at "mechanics".
J.J. Thomson (1856-1942), discoverer of the electron, conscribed to

30

a different and more plausible ether theory. Thomson had theorized—
based on Maxwell's earlier theory—that a charged spherical conductor
moving in a straight line must produce displacement currents in the
medium (Phil. Mag. xi [1881], p. 229). In 1893, twelve years later, he
claimed to have discovered "electromagnetic momentum", saying "...in
an electromagnetic field there is stored in every unit volume an amount
of mechanical momentum, proportional to the vector product of the
electric and magnetic vectors". (J.J. Thomson, Recent Researches in
Elect. And Mag. [1893], p. 13.) Thomson also was said to have developed
the theory of moving tubes of force—which harked back to Faraday's
earlier work—saying in 1891 that molecular structure is closely
connected with tubes of electrostatic force, with magnetism regarded as
a secondary force. He stated that "...the aether itself is the vehicle of
mechanical momentum, of amount (1/4*pi*C) [DB] per unit volume."
(Phil. Mag. xxxi [1891], p. 149; Recent Researches in Elect. and Mag.
[1893], chap. 1.)
Tesla Shows Up
It is interesting to note that these "discoveries" by Thomson
however, although following his initial speculations based on Maxwell's
theory, also followed Tesla's lecture before the American Institute of
Electrical Engineers at Columbia College, N.Y., on May 20, 1891, in
which he described experiments in which he had earlier pre-empted
Thomson's work with experimental verification, together with a
demonstration of techniques and machinery built by him which obtained
frequencies and voltages which W. Thomson (Lord Kelvin) had said
earlier in England, were "impossible to achieve". In that sense, the "good
old boys" in Britain should have admitted that Tesla's work was prior,
after having acquiesced in the admission without rebuttal, that "they"
were unable to create the equipment to produce the required frequencies
to investigate and to experimentally verify these phenomena.
J.J. Thomson's theory, which linked electromagnetism with
momentum in a mathematical and unified way, on paper, somewhat
repeated Tesla's earlier lecture of 1891, proven by his earlier
experiments, but Tesla's theory was different from Thomson's, whose
theory was incorrect. Thomson's electromagnetic momentum could be
created instantaneously only with Tesla's contrivances, which existed
before Thomson's "discovery", only in Tesla's laboratory, so there is no

31

way that Thomson could have reduced "his" theory to practice or
experimentally verified it.
Though the facts show that Thomson was prior to Tesla in
attempting to publish a valid theory, Tesla could not publish prior to
perfection of his invention, which was not a factor affecting Thomson.
Tesla was first to prove his theory by experimental results. Tesla
remained more than a gentleman about it, deferring often to Thomson,
though Thomson even attempted later to dishonestly claim Tesla's
alternating current and high frequency discoveries. Thomson's earlier
work (Phil. Mag. xi [1881], p. 229), concerning a charged spherical
conductor, moving in a straight line, had commanded Tesla's respect
and probably influenced his work, but Tesla's 1884 discovery of the
rotating magnetic field had already beaten them all to the punch, and
documentation shows that he had arguments with his "learned
professors" in Graz, who said he must be "crazy", from his 1870's
student days, to prove it.
It must have worked a horrible hardship on Tesla, to remain silent
about his complete theory, which he could not publish without giving
away his technology, before he could perfect a working model to get
patent protection. It was like the Wardenclyffe tower, turning in the
wind of incompleteness for lack of money, created by having been falsely
induced into building an expensive system which would exhaust his
energy and financial resources to the point of bankruptcy.
In respect to momentum, I would analogize it as follows: When a
body is held by a spinning or arcing arm, it contains the changing tubes
of force created by angular momentum. When released, it moves in a
straight line vector, corresponding to the state of the tubes of force at the
time of release. While held by the arm, centrifugal force was created by
the tendency of the tubes to move in a straight line, or at least to
continue whatever transverse or complex pattern of movement of the
tubes which then existed, which created the resistance to change by the
tubes at any moment. Once released, "something" (the microhelical
tubes of force, as they then existed) determined its direction of movement
and velocity, which in a vacuum would be force-free. These facts are
consistent with Tesla's (Thomson's, Faraday's, Maxwell's) "tubes of
force", which I will explain later in greater detail.
Most of Thomson's 1881 work harked back to Maxwell, and before
him, Faraday, who had stated in 1831 that movement of an
electrostatically charged body is equivalent to a current, which was

32

described as a tube of force created by movement and momentum
(Faraday, Experimental Res. Sec. 1644; Maxwell, Treatise, Secs. 768-70).
In his consideration of the nature of "ponderable matter", Faraday
had suggested that an atom may be nothing more than a field of force—
electric, magnetic and gravitational—surrounding a point-centre, which
is completely penetrable (Bence Jones' Life of Faraday, ii, p. 178).
Fresnel later stated, 'Upon considering the aberration of the stars, I am
disposed to believe that the luminiferous aether pervades the substance
of all material bodies with little or no resistance, as freely perhaps as the
wind passes through a grove of trees'. Fresnel's concept presupposed
that the ether surrounding the earth was unaffected by earth's motion,
and generally agrees with what is actually observed, except for his failure
to consider how the earth's dynamic electric field affects the ether.
Along with his c.1831 theory of an (elastic) solid electric ether, and
lines of magnetic force, Faraday considered all space as "filled".
Wm. Thomson (A.K.A. Lord Kelvin) (1824-1907), at age 17, based
on Faraday's earlier announcements, introduced into mathematical
science the idea of electric action at a distance by means of a continuous
ether. In 1846, he analogized electric phenomena with mechanical
elasticity. It was his early concept that material atoms move through the
ether 'without displacing it or compressing it' (letter, FitzGerald to
Heaviside, 4 Feb. 1889), concepts later to be adopted by Tesla in saying
that the ether 'behaves as a fluid to solid bodies, and as a solid to light
and heat'.
About 1853, Bernhard Riemann (1826-66) conceived an ether which
resisted compression and changes of orientation (Ann. D. Phvs. cxii
[1867], p. 237; Riemann's Werke, 2e Aufl., p. 288; Phil. Ma2. xxxiv
[1867], p. 368).
Riemann thought the resistance to compression caused gravitational
and electrostatic effects, while the resistance to changes in orientation
caused optical and magnetic phenomena, but he failed to develop these
concepts further. These early Riemann insights were however very
influential on later thinkers. He conceived a stationary ether based on
the generally accepted assumption that, as the earth moved through
space, the ability of one to see a star with a steady image disproved a
dynamic ether. As to the propagation of electric action through space,
Riemann proposed a new equation in which voltage changes outward
from charges with a velocity C, but he also failed to follow up with a
proper consideration of the properties of the ether, because he died too

33

damned young. Riemann's insights were verified almost 50 years later,
ten years longer than his entire lifetime.
Years later, Maxwell, after reading Faraday's 1831 Experimental
Researches in Electricity (3 Vols.), formed a mechanical conception of
the electromagnetic field, connecting Faraday's magnetic lines of force
and electrical ideas with the mathematical analogies of Wm. Thomson,
carrying Faraday's concepts a step further (I have always liked to say
that Maxwell "put the math to Faraday", because Faraday couldn't do
much math, though he is recognized as the greatest "experimental
philosopher" in history, a former Irish bookbinder's journeyman who
got his early education from the books he was binding, and who at age
21 happened to write a letter to chemistry professor Sir Humphrey Davy
in 1812 and so impressed him that the following spring he was appointed
a chair at the Royal Institution, and the rest is history). A sort of
electrician's Mozart, Faraday like none other, was almost always right
from the beginning, in the middle, and long after his death, with so many
remarkable insights and observations which were made without resort
to tiresome pages of math, lucky for Maxwell, who made his own
contributions in the process.
Faraday had stated that induced magnetism in iron exists only
within the iron, was zero in external free ether, and was the basis for
electrical induction. Maxwell's "electric displacement in a dielectric" was
analogous to the magnetic induction B, which he said may have a value
different from zero even in the free ether. According to Maxwell, there
is a displacement (i.e., an electric movement away from equilibrium
position) wherever there is electric force, whether "material bodies" are
present or not (thus carrying his electric displacement into the ether)
(Maxwell, Scientific Papers i, p. 451; p. 526).
It had occurred to me that since the earth and bodies "at rest" on
it are in uniform motion (or uniformly changing motion) in respect to a
stationary ether, that there were differences in electric displacement of
ether in the space within solid bodies and space within the free ether,
due to the polarization of the ether by the electric field of the earth, and
the differences in dielectric constant between the two. I deduced from

this that the constant movement of bodies through a stationary ether-
filled space, carrying their charges with them, creates the displacement

currents.
Maxwell had represented Faraday's lines of magnetic force (vectors
of magnetic induction) as the velocity of an incompressible fluid, based

34

on Faraday's suggestion years earlier that there may be a "dynamical
condition" similar to electric current, and that the 'physical lines of
magnetic force are currents' of this "fluid". This agrees with Faraday's
"dynamical condition" of the electric field 'carried along' by the earth,
equivalent to a current, producing the earth's magnetic field and
gravitation, by effects on the stationary ether within earth's dynamic
electric field. It also implies that magnetic lines of force are the "equal

and opposite" reaction to electrical current as Faraday stated, and vice-
versa, though magnetic fields are more the secondary effect of electric

currents. The magnetic field is equally important however, in its creation
of the rotatory motion imparted to electricity, which is responsible for
the microhelical "tubes of force" which create the momentum which
maintains the perpetual motion of celestial bodies in the universe, and
guides electric currents through the ether forever. And this sounds very
much like it must have been Tesla's theory as well.
Cosmic Motion and Local Momentum
The earth orbits the sun at approximately 18.5 miles per second
(66,600 mph). The solar system is orbiting the center of the Milky Way
much faster, and the Milky Way orbits the Magellanic Clouds much
faster, and so fourth. This hierarchy of velocity increases from the moon,
to the earth, the Milky Way, etc., although these pale into insignificance

relative to electromagnetic velocity, since movement of force is time-
relative. In all, the earth's velocity and polarity relative to the ether

continually varies according to its rotation, orbital position, and galactic
cycle. When between the sun and the Milky Way's center, for example,
it moves slower than when to the "outside". As the earth rotates each
day, its polarity of movement through the ether rotates 15.2 degrees per
hour, with a rotational surface velocity at the equator of approximately
1,041 mph. This continuous change in polarity is so gradual that it is
sensually imperceptible, but probably contributes to modulating the
gravity force (and may even influence our emotional states!).
According to W.B. Morton (Phil. Mag. xli [1896], p. 488), an
increase in charge of a body increases its "virtual mass", which increases
the work required to move it by amount 2e2
/3ac2
. This was in correction
of J.J. Thomson's figure. Such a case suggests a dynamo consisting of
large, insulated conductive balls on the end of a shaft, which are
alternately charged and discharged to alternately increase and decrease

35

their masses, thus rotating the shaft. But this possibility appears to be a
fantasy, since the "increase in work required to move the ball" (in
Thomson's theory) is related to an increase in the resistance to the
penetration by the ether, caused by the presence of the extra charges,
which according to Faraday created a "Faraday cage" effect which shuts
out the magnetic lines of force. Without the magnetic lines of force—or
with suppressed or diminished lines of force—the rotation of the tubes
of force by the magnetic field are diminished or stopped, resulting in a
diminution or elimination of momentum. Such propositions give ample
food for thought.
If Tesla had continued to increase the earth's charge with his
gadgetry, he could have thrown the earth's timing off, slowed it down,
and possibly caused it to drift toward the sun. Being aware of these facts,
he later addressed them and even listed them as future technical
possibilities, which also corroborated his developments in the field of
electropulsion, in case anybody noticed.
Local Momentum and Celestial Movement
It's an odd thing, momentum. If a body is in motion relative to
earth, its momentum is in the direction of motion, yet as a body at rest
on a spot on earth, it still had momentum along the spot's ultimate
motion relative to the ether. The motion is compound, but the ultimate
momentum of a body is truly a vector which represents all the forces
acting upon it.
The earth rotates at over 1,041 mph at the equator, so there is that
momentum, but the earth's orbital speed and path around the sun
means that the earth's more general path is in the direction of its orbit.
As the earth's rotating surface would appear to a distant observer to be
moving backwards from its direction of orbital motion over a period of
a day, it is always moving toward its orbital path because its orbital
speed (over 66,600 mph) is greater than its rotational speed. All the
rotation does is periodically diminish and increase the speed of our
"spot" on the earth's surface, and gradually rotate its orientation once
every 24 hours, as it moves through space. With its compound movement
and momentum—of the earth, the solar system, the Milky Way, etc.—we
have a more complex pattern of movement, and since a body which is in
constant, compound, gradual, ever-changing motion relative to the ether,
some interesting effects are bound to be found. These effects are not, as

36

described by Newton's laws, due to an attractive force acting at a
distance, through an empty space.
Due to the relatively gradual orbiting and rotating changes in
respect to the earth's motion relative to the ether-field, a relatively small

amount of "externally acting" force ("gravity) would have to be ever-
present in order for Newton's laws to apply even on the purely

descriptive level, except for the local ether phenomenon I will specify in
further detail, which insures "force-free" perpetual motion, despite the
gravitational effects. While I agree with that part of Einstein's theory
that says gravity is not due to the direct action of one object to another,
I disagree with the part that says it is due to the idea that a body
"wraps" space around itself and "curves it". Without an ether, there is
nothing to curve, and with it, there is no Relativity theory.
In early 1995, in exchange for a copy of Space Aliens, I received a
copy of Eric Lerner's The Big Bang Never Happened, and was pleased to
find there are some in the academic world of physics (or astrophysics),
who share at least in part, my own views on the Big Bang Theory,
although they don't go so far as I do in saying the theory was created
and promoted by the coercive energy monopolists, because of its
apparent intent to negate the free energy available from the ether, due
to what I call the "Law of Conservation of Perpetual Motion". I also find
Lerner's book refreshing, not to mention useful in charting some of my
ideas on a more cosmic scale.
Lerner's unsung hero is Hannes Alfven, a Norwegian astrophysicist
and cosmographer, whose earlier "academic burial" by the Relativists
was somewhat reversed in 1970 by a Nobel Prize awarded to him for his
development of magneto-hydrodynamics and his concept of frozen lines
of magnetic force, a theory later repudiated in part by Alfven himself.
Alfven had in a way replaced the word "ether" with "plasma", and
strongly disagreed with the Relativist's misuse of mathematical theory,
which he said 'must always be the servant of physical understanding and
close observation, rather than its master'. He claimed giant currents
through space, from the sun through the planets, along magnetic lines of
force, actually transfer angular momentum to the planets. This
discovery, together with his work on cosmic MHD events, places Alfven's
work very close to Tesla's Dynamic Theory of Gravity.
The appearance of such books as Lerner's is a positive development,
which represent dissent which seems intolerable to the Relativists. The
Big Bang Theory is in decline among scientists, despite all the NASA

37

false propaganda in the press and mass media attempting to perpetuate
and support it. I recommend Lerner's book, even though he has not yet
evoked an affirmative support for ether theory, but has dared to
challenge Relativism and the Big Bang cosmology.
The actual course that a particular spot on earth takes through the
universe is naturally more complex than that of the sun, since the earth
represents a smaller cycle within the larger. Relative to the ether-field,
the entire interrelated movements of the solar system and Milky Way
takes our spot in a generally wavy path, along which our velocity relative
to the ether periodically accelerates and decelerates.
The same principles of momentum which apply to the cosmos must
also apply to the motion of immediately local bodies, except that the
effects are skewered by the presence of earth's pesky electric, magnetic,

and so-called "gravity" fields. What Alfven had touch upon in his long-
unrecognized discovery of giant electric and magnetic currents through

space, are similar to unrecognized forces operative on a local scale as
well. As our planet hurls through space at 70,000 mph, and us with it,
there are things happening on a super-microscopic scale of utmost
importance, which play all-important parts in this giant panorama.
The big question—the one which those who invented the Big Bang
cosmography sought prematurely to put to rest—is how can everything
stay in perpetual motion under the Relativist theory, without violating
the law of conservation of energy...and thereby also refuting the
Relativist theory? The still-born theories of Tesla were still knawing at
their throats, along with those of Alfven, so they wanted to obscure all
truly competing theories, and enshrine themselves in the annals of
science for all time. Their method was to fabricate a scenario in which
one original giant explosion was the 'origin' from which all we see is but
an effect which will eventually "run down", like a car which is out of gas.

The missing ideas are how universal processes are continually self-
replenished. Through an interplay of natural strong and weak forces and

matter, perpetual motion is conserved. Strong forces overcome weaker
forces. Cosmic radiation travels through the ether, until it reacts with
plasma, forming matter. When matter concentrates, its forces
concentrate. In contact with other, less concentrated matter, stronger,
cosmic forces within the space it occupies are unleashed, producing
transmutations and eventually more cosmic radiation, which travels
through space until absorbed and converted by plasma or other mass,
into more mass or radiation of lower frequency, and the process

38

continues, ad infinitum.
The rigid thinker must have a simplistic answer as to "where matter
comes from", "where it is going", "what is the purpose of life", or "what
keeps everything going", etc. Sometimes we must accept reality, and
discard phony theories which attempt to give us a simplistic answer for
what we either must admit that we just don't know, or should consider
some questions too stupid to ask. The facts concerning the existence of
universal matter, forces, vast distances, massive bodies and events, and
perpetual motion, are irreducible primaries or "first laws" about reality,
which we must accept before we can progress with answering particular
questions related to the more useful aspects of existence.
Since the orbital speed of earth around the sun is greater than the
speed of earth's rotation, our spot never moves "backward" relative to
the ether. Since the orbital speed of the Milky Way is greater than the
orbital speed of the solar system or rotational speed of the earth, our spot
continues in a generally "wavy-wavy" path in which we accelerate and
decelerate over a one-day short cycle, while the entire earth moves in a
wavy path over a 365-day longer cycle, and so fourth. There are still
larger and larger cycles of motion over time, in which the solar system
orbits the Milky Way, the Milky Way orbits the Magellanic Clouds, and
so on. As can be seen from these cyclical movement, the universe is an
unlimited system of interrelated systems which move in gear-like
precision, rather than in an explosive pattern ala the Big Bang. Universal
movement is in an orderly, cyclical pattern of circles (or ellipses), within
circles, representing mechanical oscillations which are related to smaller
and larger electromagnetic ones. The exceptions to this—the occasional
cosmic explosion, such as that of a supernova—are the exceptions which
prove rather than disprove the rule. Even the occasional comet follows
a cyclical pattern, while the debris from cosmic events eventually falls
into patterns. Though such explosions on our scale are gigantic, they are
like minor ripples in a pond on a cosmic scale, and should not be allowed
to warp our perspective.
If last week a remote controlled telescope—such as the Hubbell—
showed a movement which when compared to an earlier measurement
of a few years ago indicated a movement away from a distant part of the
universe, just remember that this is only an observation of movement
which is part of a much larger pattern of oscillation over a much longer
period of time, in which the movement will later appear to be going the
other way, from our point of view, if we could make an observation

39

millions of years or longer into the future. Because of the circuitous
pattern of movement which we observe in relation to earth at the
present, and the larger structures in "our vicinity" of the universe, we
have good reason to believe that all such movements are cyclical, and to
extrapolate ourselves into the time when the appearance would be quite
different. The theory that the earth and other celestial bodies are the
result of the Big Bang are ludicrous. The universe has no age, as it has
always existed, and always will exist. The whole theory about how
planets "were created" is erroneous.
Life forms would not only have to have existed at one time on Mars,
but on all other planets and stars, at some time. In fact, the planets grew
from smaller bodies as a result of life forms, which convert interstellar
radiation into solid mass. There is no depth to which we can drill on
earth, or otherwise produce direct evidence to the contrary, where we
will not find matter which was in its past part of living things. This
theory of course makes the planet "too old" for the Big Bangers, as it
would take a much longer time to reach its present state, and would
throw their "calendar"—on which the high priests of "Big Bangery"
have placed the earth's "birth date"—off.
For example, one of the components of chlorophyll is iron. This iron
along with carbon deposits and other elements results from
photosynthesis. If strata of the earth, thousands of feet, even miles thick,
are composed of the decayed and metamorphosed remains of plant and
animal life, the original biomass represents a conversion ultimately of
radiation through photosynthesis, and into the many elements and
minerals composing the strata, which can be easily traced to this process,
such as iron, calcium, phosphorus, sulfur, nitrogen, carbon, hydrogen,

oxygen, and helium. Such elements accumulate through the cosmically-
driven forces of life forms. There is probably a constant of universal

mathematical proportionality between life forms and inorganic ones.
The ether, the medium which conducts the ZPR, can be converted
into any form of matter or energy. It is possible to precipitate any
element out of the ether, using proper technology. The ether contains the
building blocks of what we call "solid matter", the proof of which
enhances this possibility.
Nikola Tesla eventually realized the ether's use in his discovery of
the "tremendous propelling force". His electropulsive technology works,
and that is more important that splitting hairs...or atoms.
Only an ether which is intimately involved with momentum, could

40

explain such a tremendous propulsion force such as that which I
observed in 1953. This propulsive force was nothing more than a force
which exists in nature, which in the hands of man becomes an article of
will, once the physical processes capable of synthesizing and
manipulating it become known.
From the rate and manner of acceleration, in conjunction with the
probable mass of the ship I observed, it was immediately apparent that
the entire volume of the ship, if filled with conventional rocket or jet fuel,
would have been consumed in the three seconds required for it to
accelerate to c.9,000 mph and disappear at infinity, except for the
existence of Tesla's technology which electromagnetically canceled
inertia and synthesized a new momentum instantaneously.
What is inertia? Inertia is the momentum which a body 'at rest'
already possesses because it is in a state of uniform motion, but which to
us appears to be at rest. Tesla's technology uses the electromagnetic
interaction, which is 1040 times stronger than gravity, to create a
"tremendous propelling force" which instantaneously reprograms the
atoms and molecules of a ship with new micro helical tubes of force along
a new trajectory, and destroys the " memory" of the tubes of force which
created its prior inertia/momentum.
Electropulsion is a "free energy" process in which energy existing
in the environment—"gravity" and momentum—are overcome by and
replaced with the naturally stronger force of electromagnetism, to
perform a greater amount of work during a given time, which
theoretically is 1040 times more work, using a smaller amount of "input
energy" to trigger the change. If "energy" is "the ability to do work",
and "work" is the "movement of mass through a distance", then a
stronger force will do more work over a given time period. A change of
form of energy from a weaker to a stronger force (which exists in the
environment) will use "environmental energy" to do more work in a new
way.
The process which makes electropulsion possible, is the dynamism
of the universe, which naturally exchanges weaker and stronger forces
to conserve perpetual motion, with any lost momentum being resupplied
by the ZPR.

CHAPTER III: OBSERVATIONS

With Tesla's theory and the background of older research and
theories held temporarily in abeyance, let's look at what has been
directly observed either by myself of by those closely associated with me.
What I began observing in 1946, and have continued ever since, are
man-made electro-propulsive flying machines which can hover, turn on
a dime at high speed without flying apart, and accelerate almost
instantaneously to at least 9,000 mph, without readily audible sound or
sonic boom. The ship I observed in 1953, in broad daylight, hovering at
about 300 feet distance, about 250 feet above ground level, precessed at
a high angle—about 45 degrees—and a low rate of about two precessions
per second. Soon after I spotted it, it began to move away directly due
west, quickly accelerating to about 800 mph, at which time it did two
absolutely square turns—a right angle turn straight down and another
right angle turn back to level flight—then accelerated to a point of
infinity above the horizon in three seconds. The ship was constructed as
if it were two 50-foot diameter stainless steel woks joined together
clamshell fashion. It had concentric "striations"—grooves in its surface
which appeared to be about one inch wide all over its surface—which
gave its bottom half the appearance of a giant "spun-metal" wok, as it
precessed with the sun's rays playing on its bright metallic surface. The
sun was about ten degrees above the horizon at the time.
As it precessed, it gave off a sparkling, "rainbow-colored" electrical
corona, like a metallic surface which was being electrified with high
voltage Tesla currents. On the shadow side of the bottom away from the
sun, as the ship precessed, there appeared a soft, 'cloudy', infra-red
glow, which indicated the possible presence of microwaves, while the
general "rainbow" corona was apparently of high voltage electricity. As
the ship began accelerating, the rainbow corona formed a sparkling,
scintillating trail behind the ship, which also showed a "texture" of lines
in the trail which appeared to indicate the frequency of the pulses.
Since the lines appeared to be "about" five feet apart at "about" 200
mph, the frequency could have been 60 cycles per second—a frequency
which is very low, with the approx. 5-foot-spaced pulses coming at the
quarter wavelength. This rough guess is based on what "200 m.p.h."
looked like from our vantage point. (Note: In Tesla's time, "microwaves"
were those of only a few feet or inches, such as those he measured coming
from the earth during his 1899 Colorado Springs Experiments. The

42

"internal" frequency possibly used with this ship—the penetrating long
waves, oriented along the direction of acceleration, to polarize the "tubes
of force" necessary for the propulsive force to act on the ether—were
apparent from the outside, as the pulsing effect graphically illustrated
by five-foot spaces left in the scintillating ion trail.
Consistent with the observed behavior, the electro-propulsive
system appeared to instantly synthesize in an internal atomic way,
inertia and momentum, things which normally create problems in
acceleration and turning, but which the system overcame as shown by
the evidence of the square, right angle turns. The system appeared to
have very little to do with "gravity", even though it also revealed that
gravity is apparently due to the same kinds of electromagnetic
mechanisms. These observations were taken at face value, as proof of
certain facts concerning the nature of the ether, gravity, inertia,
momentum, and "electropulsion".
I had observed whole squadrons of saucers at night, between 1947-
53, during which time I slept outdoors in our back yard. The squadrons
arrived over our town from the direction of New Mexico (about ten miles
from the southern New Mexico border), and departed back in that
direction after their night-time maneuvers. (Note: The ship involved in
the 1953 sighting flew due east, toward the northern tip of Ft. Bliss, near
El Paso, Texas. Ft. Bliss was the location of Headquarters, U.S. Army
Ordinance, where Weniher von Braun was appointed research director
in the summer of 1945. The ordinance headquarters was subsequently
moved, along with von Braun's main base of operation, to Redstone
Arsenal, Alabama, about 1951.)
The night squadron saucers turned in angles of 30 degrees or
multiples (30, 60, 90,120, 180, etc. degrees). That meant they had the
same navigation and control system as the 1943-vintage German saucers
which my Peiltochterkompass was used on.
My observations, together with all the written information on the
Peiltochterkompass, and an analysis of the device itself, revealed quite
a lot about the German "Kreisel Teller- p2" and its propulsion system:
1. The ships were electrically propelled;
2. The propulsion system created an electric field around the
saucers which necessitated the development of an inertial guidance
system and compass, since a magnetic compass would be useless due to
the "Faraday cage" effect;
3. The ships were circular, discus-shaped craft, which turned in

43

twelve peripheral directions of the compass, plus "up" and "down";
4. The ships used a horizontally oriented master gyro-compass
("Meisterkreiselkompass"), calibrated prior to take-off to true north, as
the frame of reference with which to navigate the ship using an
electromagnetic slave compass, which was interconnected to stepping
switches which also actuated the ship's bi-polar propulsion electrodes;
5. the system canceled the normal effects of gravity, inertia, and
momentum, and instantly synthesized momentum in the chosen
direction, without disturbing the operation of the master gyro, which
continued to maintain its heading during flights, apparently because of
an 'internal' inertia/momentum within the ship's outer shell;
6. the instant turns showed an incompressible ether which is
integrally locked with mass in the phenomena of inertia, momentum, and
gravity.
Since the 1953 daylight sighting, I have seen many other
electropulsive craft, but one of the best sightings I made was on a
moonlit night while soaking in a hot tub.
Rub-a-Dub-Dub. Seven Folks in a Hot Tub
On a Wednesday evening, January 24, 1996, at approximately
7:00 PM, I sat in a hot tub with seven other people, at the Ten
Thousand Waves Japanese Bath House, located on the western
slopes of the Sangre de Christos Mountains, in the Hyde Park
vicinity above Santa Fe, New Mexico. As I steamed in the tub,
conversation between a couple from Denver and myself drifted from
the dangers of fluoride to "What do you do?", to which I
answered, "I write some". Asked what I had written, I answered
"A book called Space Aliens from the Pentagon."
A beautiful woman on my right exclaimed "I have your book.
I'm a friend of Alex and Rex. I love your book so much, and so
do they." I thanked her and we exchanged introductions, and then
I said, "I see saucers up here almost every time I'm here after
dark...and as a matter of fact, there's one right there" (pointing
out a flashing aircraft flying slowly easterly about 15 degrees to
the lower left of the crescent moon, at a distance of about 10,000 feet
from us).
A heckler across the tub said "Aww, that's a plane", to

44

which I responded, "There's another one...and if they're planes,
why have they parked? The flashing lights mask an underlying
glow. The eye recoils from a flash, and never has time to recover
before another flash. When they move faster, they glow brighter,
which is why they are going so slowly."
No sooner had I spoken, than the stationary ship on the left
quit flashing, and turned into a dark, glowing green shape like a
football field surrounded by a track. Around the "track" was a
dark strip, with a purple corona outside that, produced by the
Tesla coils. I could see the curvature of its bottom as it moved,
flying in a large circle, as I followed it with my Outstretched arm
and index finger, and my fellow hot-tubbers oggled in jaw-dropped
amazement. The following is a black-and-white photo of a painting I did
of the saucer, as seen from the bottom:

It returned to its starting point, skidded to a halt, and began
flashing again. This took approximately ten seconds. Since the ship
appeared about one-half to three-quarters of an inch at arm's
length (about 2 feet), at the 10,000-foot distance, it was around 400
feet long and 250 feet wide. Since the diameter of the circle from

45

top to bottom was about 30 degrees, its speed was about 2,000
miles per hour (the speed didn't surprise me, since I clocked the
one I saw in 1953 over our back yard at minimum of 9,000 mph
when it departed). I almost missed it, because I didn't have my
glasses, and because it a ppeared to have been
"stealth-ized"—designed to be concealed by the night sky, by
controlling its emissions to be a dark green and purple, so as to
more closely match the light value and blend into the night sky. The
main 'give-away' was the color differences.
Others in the tub—most of whom didn't need glasses—saw
it more sharply than I, yet wouldn't have seen it at all if I had
not pointed it out to them. I probably would not have seen it
myself, had I not been observing the flashing ships beforehand,
with the moon so close above, creating some back-lighting which
helped to define the darker silhouette when it developed. Moreover,
the real reason I saw it, was my own preconscious mental
self-conditioning.
I was amazed at its large size, since, when flashing, it
appeared much smaller. When I finally looked back to the other
side of the tub, the heckler was gone, the on-cue saucer demo
being apparently too much for him. If the saucer crew had been
listening to my words, their performance couldn't have been more
perfectly timed. Bravo! Do they also have some computer software
that reads lips? It is my theory that the government jerks have
chosen that particular location to do some "testing", because of
the titillating availability of the numerous private hot tubs open to
the night sky, occupied by private nude couples of all sexual
persuasions, ready to be video taped by them. I can just see them
trading the tapes among themselves, another good reason to
"...keep the secret", to avoid prosecution.
It was the first time I had seen the green-glowing type
reported years ago by astronomer Clyde Tombaugh, discoverer of
the planet Pluto. It was the second most graphic demonstration of
saucer technology I have witnessed. If I had not spotted it, none
of us would have seen anything extraordinary, excluding the
beautiful lady next to me who liked my book, and was a strong
competition to the saucers. Incidentally, the female breast shape
may be "natures most nearly-perfect shape for a flying saucer
design". Hmmm...maybe the "cigar-shaped" ships were dreamed up

46

by a woman. The "green-glowing" type was apparently the result
of research designed to make the ships less visible in the night sky,
since the early models—such as the "foo-fighters" ("Fliegende
Schildkrote" ["Flying Turtle"] and "Kugelblitz" ["Ball Lightning"])
glowed brightly. The oblong design (as distinguished from the
circular or 'peripheral' saucers) comports with what I call the
"linear type" in my book. According to a friend who is an expert
spectrographer, the green corona indicated atomic absorption,
which I presume to be 'stealth' technology used to suppress the
white light spectrum. He seemed to think sodium based coating,
while I think maybe chromium, because it appeared to be a
veridian ("chrome") green. The soft, 'cloudy' green also indicated
positive corona, as distinguished from the 'hairy' negative (purple)
corona around the outer periphery.
Comparison to Other Siehtings
The hot tub sighting was not a clear, "daylight", "close-range"
sighting, like the first good sighting which I had personally made on
a bright, late summer afternoon in West Texas, in 1953, within 300
feet, right over our back yard, in Kermit, Texas, as our family and
friends were having an ice cream party. I had been the last in my
family and neighborhood to see a saucer in a close-up daylight
sighting, since three had appeared on two consecutive days, June
1st and 2nd 1950, while I was unfortunately in the Davis
Mountains about 120 miles to the west. My father has seen more
of them than I, and was once held in his car for 15-30 minutes,
on the night of Nov. 2, 1957, just south of Levelland, Texas, by
one of the 200-foot-long, egg-shaped chingas, which had scared the
livin' daylights out of him. The thing hovered within ten feet of
his car top, killed his engine, and burned out all his lights, yet
failed to burn out a single fuse in any of the car's circuits. The
saucer's electric field was so strong that it arrested current flow,
and was strong enough to cancel the magnetic fields in the
generator and circuits. The white-hot tungsten filaments were the
weakest points in the circuits, and the saucer's pulse currents
apparently subjected them to magnetic and electric shear forces
which broke them apart.
My father had to drive back to Levelland in the dark, spend the

47

night in a motel, then drive home to Odessa, Texas at dawn's first light.
He arrived home about 7:00 AM, had a quick breakfast, and left for
Sewell Ford to have his lights fixed, saying nothing about the saucer. I
turned on the TV for the morning news as he left, and realized that he
had been one of the several drivers held by the ship (or ships) that night.
I drove to Sewell Ford, and questioned him about it as the mechanic
fixed the lights. He asked how I knew about it, and I told him it was on
the news. He said he didn't want to be called "crazy". This was what I
call "anti-paranoia". It was reasonable to fear ridicule created by
government propaganda.
Later, in 1963, I had the opportunity to discuss the matter
more fully with the sheriff of Hockley County, while working in
Brownfield, Texas, as a graphic artist, doing advertising art for a
manufacturing and publishing operation which had contact with
the soil conservation district with which the sheriff was affiliated.
The ship seen by my father matched in shape, appearance, and
performance, the type observed by deputy Lonnie Zamora, near
Soccorro, New Mexico. Zamora had at first described the crew of
the ships as typical G.Ls in grey-green Air Force jump suits, but
later altered his story, saying they were "...about the size of
children". This was after the security spooks 'leaned' on him.
Saucers can be seen almost any night in the area where I live, and
are very profuse in an even more obvious way around the Cheyenne
Mountain area to the south of Colorado Springs, where the underground
NORAD complex is located. With the several direct observations, or
reports from those in my family or from my close friends as "proof of the
pudding" kept firmly in mind, let's see what more can be found in ether
theory history to reflect on them.
The Ether and "Ponderable Matter"
In 1879, James Clerk Maxwell (1831-1879) said that the velocity of
the solar system relative to the ether could be determined by observing
the retardation of the eclipses of Jupiter's satellites. The observed
behavior—in which the light of a star can be viewed with a steady image
as the earth moves through space—indicates a stationary ether relative
to a moving earth, solar system, and other bodies. The ether is ultrafine,
yet very dense, and composed of positive and negative electric matter,
which pervades all so-called "free space", as well as the space "occupied"

48

by "mass"—which the old ether physicists called "ponderable matter"-—
because it is mostly "space". Since the ether is stationary, it is the
ponderable bodies' which move through it, just as Fresnel said, rather
than vice-versa.
The ether is transparent, because of its ultra fine, high frequency

structure, which does not refract or reflect visible light, because its ultra-
fine size is too tiny to react to such low frequency radiation. To

momentively "access" the ether in a propulsive way, high voltage pulses
are required. This is in accord with J.J. Thomson's "electromagnetic
momentum" theory, and was confirmed by the tests conducted by Nikola
Tesla by 1891 (later detailed in his 1891 lecture before the A.I.E.E.,
Columbia College, N.Y.). Tesla's tests confirmed a reaction which was
more than the feeble ionic reaction of light gases such as the
misinformational 1950's "patents" of T. Townsend Brown later
attempted to induce the gullible public to believe was the correct
technology. After his tests, Tesla stated that the ether became a 'solid
state' medium to "light and heat" (visible and infrared light), and could
be accessed by subjecting it to "sufficiently high voltage and frequency".
The ether becomes more apparent when there is a sudden change
in the direction of motion, rate of acceleration, or velocity of a body. The
movement of a charged body, equivalent to a current, creates a new
degree of electrical displacement of the ether through which it moves,
and influences the resistance to changes in velocity through the affected
ether by the protons and electrons composing the body itself. The
increased work required to move the sphere—caused by an increased
"resistance" called "inertia", must be reflected by the increase in its
tendency to remain in motion which is called "momentum", which
demonstrates a rearrangement of the manner of movement of or
displacement of the positive and negative charges which correspond to
the motion. Therefore, once in motion at a constant velocity, though a
charged body requires more conventional work to set it in that motion,
its momentum would be increased by the increased charges, consistent
with an increase of its "virtual mass". It is clear that both inertia and
momentum are caused by the same thing, which is a persistence by the
configuration of reaction patterns in the atomic and electric structure of
mass to maintain their present states. Just as changing magnetic fields
or electric fields are required for inductance, the creation of such
changing fields by changing motion are the basis for inertia and
momentum.

All bodies are in motion, and within all bodies, protons and
electrons are also in motion, because "elasticity" and vibratory motion
occurs in "ponderable matter" and in the ether. The ether sets up certain
patterns of motion in the electrons and protons (and atoms and
molecules) in ponderable matter passing through it.
As the earth passes through the ether, its rapidly varying
electrostatic forces reach out for some distance and polarize the negative
electrical components of the ether, and affects bodies within its reach,
creating what we call "gravity".
The stationary ether, appearing to move through an earth-bound
body, due to the earth's motion through it, undergoes a change in
electrical displacement, due to the difference in dielectric constant
between the space outside the body and the space within the body. The
electrical displacement in the ether outside the body prior to entry, and
the electrical displacement as it enters and passes through the body,
changes due to the change in dielectric constant, and affects the "electric
content" (protons and electrons, electric charges and fields, and
magnetic fields) within the body. These changes in turn cause the
changes in electric displacement of the ether—a downward thrust on the
body's atoms, away from the pre-existing "equilibrium position", which
the atoms would occupy in the absence of gravity—just as Maxwell said.
The "equilibrium position" for the electrical particles of ponderable
matter vary according to the dielectric constant. A change in dielectric
constant results in a change in the equilibrium position, through an
electric displacement, which eventually may result in a new equilibrium
position. The time-relative aspect of gravity is due to the inertia of a
falling body at any stage of its fall, which forces the gradual increase in
pitch of its micro helical tubules.
In summary, inside an earth-bound body at rest relative to the
earth, there is a difference in polarization and displacement effects, from
those which exist outside the body in free space. Since earth's electric
field is graduated through the intermediate space, between the negative
at earth's surface, and the positive at the ionosphere, the dielectric
properties are subjected to graduated strains. The effects of electrical
displacement and gravity vary accordingly, somewhat like Newton's
"inverse square" law. It is here that a difference between the "force of
gravity" and the effects of inertia and momentum become apparent.
Traditionally, inertia has always been considered (according to
Newton's First Law of Motion) the tendency of a body "at rest" or in

50

"constant velocity" relative to the earth, to continue its state of rest or
constant velocity, unless acted upon by an external force. Since all bodies
at rest relative to the earth are already moving at the same "constant
velocity" of the earth however, only changes in movement relative to the
earth are at issue, and any such changes affect the patterns of flow
within mass of the tubes of force, as it moves through the ether, at any
given time. Since only a body which moves in respect to the earth has
been traditionally said to have "momentum" ("the product of a body's
mass and velocity"), this rule is wrong, since all bodies "at rest" relative
to earth already have "momentum" as well as "inertia".
Momentum and inertia are due to the exact same "tendency",
which relates ultimately to a frame of reference to the universal ether,
but for convenience—since we don't have an absolute "fix" on the ether
yet—we use the moving earth as a frame of reference from which to
measure a body's rate of change relative to the ether, as the earth
maintains its relatively constant velocity. There is a special case on earth,
because the ether within the reach of earth's electric field has been
"conditioned"—that is, its dielectric constant has been subjected to
electric strain. This comports with Tesla's statements concerning the
effects of "rapidly varying electrostatic forces" emanating from earth.
The earth has momentum within the sun's frame of reference, just
as a moving car has momentum within the earth's frame of reference.
Some physicists have mistakenly applied a "field of influence' idea,
thinking this "field of gravitational influence" somehow isolates a body
from references outside this field. I believe that earth's "gravitational
field" is a product of its moving electric field (a "current") as it
influences the ether within it, and that the so-called "gravity field"
extends no further than earth's electric field.
Momentum is due to the setting up inside a body, of micro helical
tubular vibrations of atomic structures, composed of electrical particles—
-electrons and protons—as the body passes through the ultra fine ether.
The micro helical rotation of these tubules are the product of the
magnetic rotation of the plane of polarization identified by Faraday. Any
variance from earth's uniform motion results in a resistance to change
in micro helical pitch, since the rotating tubes of force spin around so
much of the irrotational ether cores ("Onmi") over a given period of
time, and a change in motion requires them to rotate around a
commensurately greater or lesser quantity of Omni, depending on
whether the change is an acceleration or deceleration. The tubules

51

possess electromagnetic force which is locked into the discrete flow
pattern between the Omni and the tubules, which are coupled to the
'ponderable matter' structure which is the recipient of the momentum.
It is probable that the linkage between matter and the ether is effected
by a current—perceived as "electric charge"— which passes through the
matter constantly at a rate which is commensurate to the relative
velocity difference.
Though the flow patterns of the microhelical tubules are always
gradually changing—because of the continual reorientation of the earth
as it moves in its "uniformly compound" changing ways, these changes
are sensually imperceptible because they are gradual over time, with
effects which are virtually constant. Though the changes are too slow to
sense, the action of the tides is probably related to them.
The natural gravity force is always normally toward the earth,
which is negatively charged, within earth's electric/gravity field, due to
the polarity of that field, since the negative component of the ether in
free space is electrically displaced upward by the repulsion of like
charges, while the inertial characteristics of the more massive positive
component is forced and attracted downward, and is more resistant to
changes in displacement. As the ether enters a body at rest on earth, its
displacement changes because of the change in dielectric constant, just
as Maxwell said. As the dielectric constant of the body changes, the
electric displacement of the ether within the entrained atomic structure
of the body changes, creating a downward force as each of the negative
electrical components of the ether move downward, creating an
increased attractive force on protons above, and an increased repulsive
force on electrons below.
The moving ether particles create the gravity force, similar to how
an inverted aerodynamic airfoil creates a down-force on an airplane. Due
to the greater velocity of the electromagnetic interaction at C however,
this down-force is irrespective to the direction of earth's movement
relative to the ether, since the interaction between the electrical
components of matter and the ether at C, is due to the conditioning of
the ether by earth's electric field, which is vertically polarized, and
creates the same proximate effect on mass over time, irrespective as to
earth's orientation relative to the ether. Though the velocity of earth
relative to the ether is thousands of miles per hour, it is not fast enough
to "outrun" the electromagnetic interaction.

Orbiting Planets and Satellites
The concept that a satellite in orbit around earth is "held" in orbit
by "earth's field of gravity", seems false. The logical implication of my
analysis is that the orbital path taken by a body is because it "sees" that
path as one of least resistance, as if it were a straight and level path. Since
for a given radius above earth the ether is displaced to a certain degree,
an orbiting body would experience an accelerating force which would
be met by inertia, if it were to move upward, and a decelerating force
which would be met by momentum, if it were to move downward, so its
path in force-free constant velocity remains at a constant radius or level
of etheric displacement, as the path of least resistance.
Since the determinative factor which limits a body's motion is the
reactance of its internal electrical content with the ether at its particular
degree of displacement by earth's electric field, at a given altitude, an
orbiting body "sees" its orbital path along a path of like displacement,
as a straight and level path, even though it is a straight and orbiting
path. This path is rather concentric to the earth at a certain altitude.
This is similar to how Einstein said that space and time are "wrapped"
around a large spinning body as it moves through space, except Einstein
believed in no ether, without which "empty space" would have nothing
to "wrap".
One of the revealing facts obviated by films of astronauts floating
in the so-called "gravity-free" space of an orbiting space station, is the
contradictory assertion that the space station is "held" in orbit by
earth's gravity. If the earth's gravity exerted sufficient force to hold the
station in orbit, the internal environment would not be "gravity free",
but would pull the astronauts down to the floor, instead of allowing them
to float all around inside, as we've seen so many times on TV. Yet, there
is sufficient elasticity within the internal masses of the astronauts'
bodies, between electrical content and the ether, to allow movement in
that manner. Maxwell said this elasticity resides in the magnetic fields.

CHAPTER IV: HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF THE THEORY
Rotatory Motion and the "Screw Effect"
Wm. Thomson (Lord Kelvin) first asserted that magnetism
possesses a "rotatory" character related to heat or the thermal motions
of a body (Proc. R.S. viii [1856], p. 150). Nikola Tesla made many
references to Wm. Thomson, pointing to his work as a prelude to his own
discoveries and applications which especially intensified in 1892. A
review of the work of the world's major minds leading up to Tesla's
breakthrough is necessary to show just what Tesla discovered and what
it meant in respect to ether physics and physics in general.
Around 1870, Thomson had conducted experiments which seemed
to indicate that "gravitational action" could be induced by spheroidal
bodies oscillated by electrical currents or mechanical pulses (F. Guthrie
Phil. Mag. xli [1871], p. 405). The surface pulsations could cause
attractions or repulsions in respect to other bodies, as verified by
Thomson. Tesla was aware of Thomson's work during his student days
in Graz, Austria, beginning 1875, when he was 19. Thomson's work
undoubtedly served as the spark of inspiration for Tesla in his early
conception of an "ideal flying machine" which would be propelled by
electricity acting upon the ether. This explains Tesla's continual
references to Thomson, such as demonstrating during his 1892 London
lecture, a 'luminous wire' sign powered by a Tesla coil, which said
"WILLIAM THOMSON".
At first, Thomson found that ponderomotive forces act between two
solid bodies immersed in an incompressible fluid, when one of the bodies
is immobilized and made to oscillate with a force which acts along a line
between its center and that of a much larger sphere which is free. The
free sphere was attracted to the smaller (immobilized) sphere, if its
density was greater than the fluid, while a sphere of less density than the
fluid was repelled or attracted, according to the ratio of its distance to
the vibrator in relation to a certain quantity (Phil. Mag, xli [1871], p.
405; Letter, Thomson to F. Guthrie, p. 427.)
Thomson's experiments were analogical ones, for which he had evoked
praise from his contemporaries even when he was still a teenager,
although his refusal to believe anyone's assertions unless he could build
an analogical model to prove them often led to the consternation of those
of his contemporaries, such as Maxwell, who relied often on

54

mathematical equations. The sphere experiments were designed to use
mechanical and electrical wave methods to construct a model to probe
the gravitational, inertial and momentive reactions of solid bodies in the
ether.
The Faraday effect—the rotation of the plane of polarization of
radiation in a dielectric medium (such as the atmosphere, space, and
certain solid materials) in a magnetic field—stated that the angle of
rotation of radiation is proportional to the magnetic field strength and
the length of the path in the medium in the field. These early
experimenters knew there was a connection between the rotatory motion
and momentum, and sought to find it.
The rotatory (versus the linear) character of magnetic phenomena
was strengthened by Thomson's experimentally verified conclusions on
the magnetic rotation of light. This rotatory character not only
influenced Tesla's discovery of the rotating magnetic field, but is also
fundamental to inertia and momentum, as I will later explain, since
movement of a charged body constitutes a current which creates a
magnetic field which creates the rotatory motion which "bores" through
the ether like a drill to create momentum.
Thomson's system was later investigated by C.A. Bjerknes between
1877 and 1910. Bjerknes showed that when two spheres immersed in an
incompressible fluid were pulsated, they exerted a mutual attraction
which obeyed Newton's inverse square law if the pulsations were in
phase, while if the phases differed by a half wave, the spheres repelled.
At one quarter wave difference, there was no action. Where pulses were
non-instantaneous at distances greater than a quarter wavelength,
attractions and repulsions were reversed (Repertorium d. Mathematik
I [Leipzig, 1877], p. 268; Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc. iii [1879], p. 276; iv
[1880], p. 29).
The publishings of these researches and experiments in the physical
journals of Europe were available to Nikola Tesla, during his student
days at the Polytechnic Institute in Graz, Austria, and at the University
of Prague, in Czechoslovakia. Tesla could read and understand all these
pertinent journals in their original languages.
Around 1878, George Francis FitzGerald (1851-1901) (Phil Trans.
clxxi [1880], p. 691; FitzGerald's Scientific Writings, p. 45) compared
magnetic force and velocity in a quasi-elastic solid, based on a model
devised earlier by James MacCullagh (1809-47) (Brit. Assoc. Rep.,
[1835]), whose model was the only one which could propagate waves

55

with the properties of light—obviously analogous to the electromagnetic
theory of light—as shown by MacCullagh's ether equation of motion and
ether theory which made it feasible to extend ether concepts to represent
optical phenomena, along with magnetic and electric interaction.
An Electrostatic Charge Carried Around
In 1879, Edwin H. Hall (Amer. Jour. Math, ii [1879], p. 287) a
student in Baltimore, repeated an experiment suggested by H. A.

Rowland, his professor, whose original experiment with a gold-foil-
covered ebonite disk in a magnetic field showed that electric charges on

a disk were carried around with it as it was rotated (Ann, d. Phys, clviii
[1876], p. 487). In Hall's experiment, a gold leaf strip in which a current
was flowing, was placed into a magnetic gap. This produced an
electromotive force at right angles to the magnetic field and the current,
which was proportional to the product of the two. Called the "Hall
Effect", it was already inherent in the three previous effects discovered
much earlier by Faraday.
Faraday had discovered induction, by forcing a conductor through
a magnetic field, cutting the lines of magnetic force and producing a
current in the conductor. The second of Faraday's triad was production

of a magnetic field in an unmagnetized iron core, by forcing a current-
carrying conductor through a gap between the poles of a core. Faraday's

third effect was the generation of a current. Though Hall's effect was
inherent in the fact that it was the reverse of the force required by
Faraday to push the conductor through a magnetic field. Hall's work
completed the triad of effects, by bringing it into consciousness. This
effect is the basis for MHD (Magneto-Hydrodynamic) generators, and
electropropulsion, through the special means which would finally be
brought into fruition by the work of Tesla.
Since the galvanometer needle in Hall's experiment was deflected
only when the magnetic field arose or collapsed, the physical thrust
created was a vector product which had already been expressly
suggested in Maxwell's Treatise (1862), almost 15 years earlier (derived
from Maxwell's analysis relative to Faraday's work of c. 1845), though
Maxwell failed to follow up with experiment (because he died), the
equations are still used.
Though it was said by Whittaker that the Hall effect, like the
magnetic rotation of light, occurs only in ponderable bodies and not in

56

the "free ether", this statement was patently false, since the effect
actually depends on the conductivity of a medium. This was a definite lie
on Whittaker's part, probably "required" under the 1951 revision. The
fact that the effect occurs in "ponderable bodies" and "conductive
media" however, is all-important for electropropulsion, since it shows the
reaction between such bodies and media and the underlying "etheric
framework" which is accessed in the process.
Since the "natural media" (the ether and the atmosphere) so often
referred to by Tesla in his patents become conductive under the
influence of electromagnetic radiation of sufficiently high voltage and
frequency, the effects in the free ether, dependent upon proper
conditions, can affect the ether within a ponderable body, so as to move
the body through the free ether. The most startling proof that the Hall
effect works in the free ether, was Tesla's "transmission" of electrical
energy through space by high frequency oscillations, as detailed in his
1892 Lecture before the Institute of Electrical Engineers, London.
Since an electric field 'displaces' the ether—which is the basis for
MHD pumping (especially when pulsed)—the effect actually showed an
operable "electromotive force" ("emf"), or "electro-propulsive force",
between ponderable bodies and the ether, by means of electromagnetic
action. The high voltage and high frequency are required by the ether's
great density and ultra-fineness. The moment Tesla had succeeded in
transmitting electrical energy by means of high voltage, high frequency
currents—"radio waves"—the ether was "accessed". Tesla's work at
that point had already verified experimentally everything that Maxwell
had mathematically analyzed as being the electromagnetic nature of
light.
Though it was strongly implied, the literature available to me failed
to explicitly state the idea that inertia and momentum are the products
of an electromagnetic rotatory force which acts within bodies, upon a
dense, incompressible ether which permeates all bodies and all space.
Neither was it specified that a pulsating sphere or other ponderable body
can be electrically propelled through the ether, without the presence of
another sphere or other ponderable body to pull against—except in the
statements of Nikola Tesla and his "flivver"/"model T" electropulsive
"ideal electric flying machine".
In 1884, the year Tesla discovered the rotating magnetic field, J.J.
Thomson attempted to determine the field produced by a moving
electrified sphere, and the mathematical development of Maxwell's

57

theory accelerated. It was naturally easier to solve such problems from
the known behaviors of simple geometric forms—planes, spheres, and
cylinders (J.J. Thomson, Proc. Lond. Math. Soc. xv [1884], p. 197).
The possibility that the ether was composed of stationary positive
charges carrying their own 'sub-electronic' negative charges which were
elastic, and could be displaced, had apparently evaded the thinking of
Thomson. Although he had assumed that displacement currents must
occur in the ether, he had earlier thought this was due to the magnetic
effects of moving charges, though he failed to show how the displacement
currents occurred, or what their effects were in terms of inertia and
momentum.
There was already a sort of battle brewing between the proponents
of classical electrodynamics, and the proponents led by Maxwell of an
electromagnetic theory of light. To the former, conductivity occurred in
metal wires, etc., while with Maxwell, it occurred in the surrounding
dielectrics and ether-filled space, with the conductors serving only to
"guide" the action. Tesla appeared to fit more into the Faraday/Maxwell
camp. FitzGerald had unified the two views by arguing validly that
Maxwell's unification was valid because radiation could be generated by
purely electrical means.
Along this line, Thomson (1884) first considered a charged sphere
moving uniformly in a straight line. He assumed that the electric charges
were uniformly distributed, with an electric field the same in all
directions, no matter what position the sphere was in, the same as if it
were at rest. This assumption proved true so long as the velocity of the
sphere and the velocity of light were neglected.
In 1889, Wm. Thomson (Proc. Roy. Irish Acad. i [30 Nov. 1889], p.
340), stated, "Rotational vortex-cores must be discarded; and we must
have nothing but irrotational revolution and vacuous cores." By this,
Thomson meant that the vacuous "ether", inside rotating tubes of
electromagnetism, did not rotate, presumably because of its density, but
also because, if the cores rotated along with the rotating tubes of
electromagnetic force, it would neutralize the electro-mechanical action
by which momentum is created.
FitzGerald found a purported error in Thomson's work, saying that
the required "circuital condition" was not satisfied unless the moving
charges on the sphere were considered as current, combined with the
displacement and convection currents due to the motion. In correcting
Thomson's error, FitzGerald went overboard in concluding that the

58

magnetic force due to the displacement currents of the moving sphere,
had no resultant effect. In this conclusion, FitzGerald seemed to have
forgotten the "Faraday cage" and "magneto-optical" effects, since a
moving charged sphere would constitute a current by his own admission,
and all currents create magnetic fields, which cause the rotation of
electromagnetic radiation and light in the surrounding ether as a
resultant effect.
In 1888, Oliver Heaviside showed that the electrostatic and
electromagnetic units "vanished" inside the sphere. This was the
opposite to Faraday's experiment in which electrostatic charges placed
inside a stationary, closed vessel, "appeared" on the outside. Apparently,
movement of the sphere—which increases its momentum—appeared to
Heaviside to force the charges back inside. Heaviside's conception of the
"spherical" symmetry of charges during movement was disproved by
G.C.F. Searle in 1896 (Phil. Trans, clxxxvii [1896], p. 675). Searle found
that a moving "point charge" system is not a sphere, but an oblate
spheroid, with a polar axis along its direction of motion. What Whittaker
failed to point out, was the importance of this finding, a connection
between inertia, momentum, current, surface charges "vanishing" and
"reappearing", and an electromagnetic polarity along the direction of
momentum, as well as an electro-mechanical link to the ether, since the
displacement of the electric lines and polarity correspond to the
movement, consistent to my thinking that the tubules create momentum
inside a moving body. The "vanishing" electrostatic/electromagnetic
units are 'occupied' internally by the microhelices, in perpetuating the
movement of the body through the ether.
During this time, Nikola Tesla had not tarried. He had already
shown that the "circuitous condition" could be met in a totally new way.
In his lecture before the A.I.E.E. at Columbia College, N.Y., May 20,
1891, he demonstrated his years-old technology, and stated that he
connected "one terminal" to a lamp and the other to "an insulated body
of the required size. In all cases the insulated body serves to give off the
energy into the surrounding space, and is equivalent to a return wire." In
this lecture, Tesla also demonstrated "electromagnetic momentum"
which J.J. Thomson was accredited with discovering in 1893 (J.J.
Thomson, Recent Researches in Elect. And Mag., [1893],p. 13).
In the same year as Searle's finding (1896), W.B. Morton (Phil.
Mag, xli |1896], p. 488) similarly showed that the surface density of a
charged body is unaltered by motion, but the lines of force no longer

59

leave the surface perpendicularly. He also found that the energy of the
surrounding field is greater when in motion than when at rest. Since
greater work is required to create a given velocity for a charged sphere,
than for an uncharged one, and since the sphere can even move in a way
which lessens the work, a connection between moving charges and an
ether was verified. This was considered true because the charges
increased the "virtual mass" of the sphere, and the self-induction of
convection currents is formed when the charges are set in motion by
movement of the sphere, but neither of these explanations seemed to
explicitly note that a force between a moving charged mass and the space
through which it moves must have an ether framework to push or pull
against, or that a current is caused to flow between matter and the ether
due to the movement.
J. Larmor (Phil. Trans, clxxxvi [1895], p. 697) suggested that the
inertia of ponderable matter may be ultimately proven to be of this
nature, since atoms were constituted of systems of electrons. The only
objection to this was an inconsistency with the alleged "indivisibility" of
the electron. This "indivisibility" I believe is due to a deceptive
"apparent effect", produced by measuring instruments which measure
only "whole" electrons, because they use only "whole protons", rather
than ether particles. An "undivided electron" is the "equal and opposite"
response to a "whole" positive charge. This is similar to Werner
Heisenberg's "uncertainty principle", in that exact measurement of less
than a whole electron is made impossible by the instruments of
measurement.
If a greater "virtual mass" effect (W.B. Morton, supra) is created
electrically, which increases or decreases the ease of movement of a body
through the "free ether", and increases the total energy of the moving
system, then a link between ponderable bodies and the etheric
framework was proven, and the means for creating the imbalance of
forces necessary for electro-propulsion—the use of moving charges in a
specific way to synthesize the currents of a moving system—was just a
matter of time and money for Nikola Tesla.
There were implications in the works of Faraday, Maxwell, Wm.
Thomson, J.J. Thomson, MacCullagh, Morton, Searle, Heaviside, Hall,
and FitzGerald, of a distinct relationship between momentum and the
movement of charges connected to mass, through an interpenetrating
gaseous, dynamic, neutral, ultra-fine ether existing in all space and
ponderable matter, upon which electromagnetic ponderomotive forces

60

act. Once the equilibrium of the ether and ZPR was "disturbed" by the
moving system, the 'displacement' could be rectified only by an equal
and opposite reaction, which was a flow of current between the moving
system and the ether. Thomson had accepted the principle that the ether
itself is the vehicle of mechanical momentum. The Hall effect had shown
that an electromotive thrust is produced along a third axis as a result of
a current and magnetic field at right angles, and though it was alleged
that this thrust could not be produced "in the free ether", but only in
ponderable matter, the works of Heaviside, Searle, and Morton showed
that the moving charges could either increase or decrease the normal

ease of movement of a body, proving the feasibility for electro-
propulsion.

Since electrical processes are reversible, Tesla's method consisted
of using Hall's MHD method to cause a flow of current between a
'stationary' system (relative to earth) and the ether—as if it were a
"dynamic" system—since it mimicked the currents of a moving system,
and created a disturbance in the ether which could only be rectified by
movement of the system. Once the current commenced to flow, the
magnetic fields thus created, imparted the rotatory force which created
the micro helical tubes of force which 'drilled' their way around the
irrotational ether cores, and synthesized the momentum which propelled
the system through the ether.
Nikola Tesla's statement (Lecture before the Institute of Immigrant
Welfare, May 12,1938), that he had his Dynamic Theory of Gravity "all
worked out" by 1893, and some 'available' documentation of Tesla's
work of 1891 or earlier shows that he was already ahead of the European
field led by J.J. Thomson, Searle, Morton, and Larmor, whose
statements dated from the later 1890's.
As for his 1915 progress, Tesla stated in a Dec. 8,1915 New York
Times article that his electro-propulsive "...manless airship..." would
travel "...300 miles a second..." (1.08 million mph), "...without propelling
engine or wings, sent by electricity to any desired point on the globe...".
The Sept. 22, 1940 New York Times article by Wm. L. Laurence
completed the documentation, by stating that Tesla had already tested
his four-part Teleforce system, which included "...a new method for
producing a tremendous electrical propelling force...", as used on his
electrical aircraft.

CHAPTER V: TESLA AND THE GOOD OLD BOYS' CLUB
When Tesla popped into the picture, the British "Good Old Boy's
Club" had been debating ether theory for quite some time, and the
upstart Tesla must have hurt the pride of their linemen, by making an
end run to make a touchdown.
In 1847, W. Thomson, in discussing the motion of a magnetizable
body in a non-uniform field of force, said a charged body attracts a body
having a greater specific inductive capacity than that of the surrounding
medium, and repels a body with a lower specific inductive capacitance,
to afford the path of best conductance to the lines of force.
Thomson had also stated that an electrode immersed in a fluid
insulating medium (an experimental analogy to a body in ether-filled
space), at "...sufficiently high frequency", would cause a gravitation of
gases all around toward the electrode, but that the general opinion (of he
and his European colleagues) was that it was "out of the question" that
such frequencies could be reached. This last opinion was soon to be
disproved by a close follower and admirer of Thomson's work.
In reiteration, another Thomson—J.J. Thomson—had claimed to
have mathematically developed the theory of moving tubes of force (Phil.
Mag, xxxi [1891], p. 149). For his Recent Researches in Electricity and
Magnetism (1893, p. 13), his hypothesis was the "the aether is a
storehouse of mechanical momentum", but was this correct? Isn't it
more likely that the "storehouse" of "mechanical momentum" is in
"ponderable matter" which reacts with the ether?
Nikola Tesla's lecture before the A.I.E.E. at Columbia College in
1891 was based on earlier experiments. He mentioned the "tubes of
force" and disclosed some of his discoveries concerning ether and
momentum. His Feb., 1892 lecture before the Institute of Electrical
Engineers, London, at a time when the Good Old Boys were still
debating whether an electromagnetic action could occur in the free ether,
Tesla explained he planned to run motors at a distance by wireless
energy, with equipment he had already built, and to extract free energy
from the environment.
Four years later, Wm. Thomson stated his "inclination" to
"speculate" that "alterations of electrostatic force due to rapidly
changing electrification" are propagated by "condensational waves in
the luminiferous aether" (Bottomley, Nature liii [1896], p. 268). This
seemed to indicate that Thomson was just beginning to take Tesla

62

seriously.
In his 1892 London lecture for the Good Old Boys, Tesla had stated
that the 'required' frequencies— which Thomson had said were "out of
the question" to be produced—were "...much lower than one is apt to
estimate at first", and continued (in pertinent part, emphasis mine):
"We may cause the molecules of the gas to collide by the use of alternate
electric impulses of high frequency, and so we may imitate the process
of a flame; and from experiments with high frequencies which we are
now able to obtain, I think the result is producible with impulses which
are transmissible through a conductor." "...it appeared to me of great
interest to demonstrate the rigidity of a gaseous column"..."with such
low frequencies as, say 10,000 per second which I was able to obtain
without difficulty from a specially constructed alternator." "...how must
a gaseous medium behave under the influence of enormous electrostatic
stresses which may be active in the interstellar space, and which may
alternate with inconceivable rapidity?"
In this respect, Tesla seemed also to address the omnidirectional
ZPR. His statements also show he was attempting to make up his mind
as to the characteristics of the ether, such as whether it is rigid or fluidic,
and under what circumstances it may change, and its static or dynamic
nature, of high or low density, and so fourth: "What determines the
rigidity of a body? It must be the speed and amount of moving matter.
In a gas the speed may be considerable, but the density is exceedingly
small, in a liquid the speed would be likely to be small, though the
density may be considerable; and in both cases, the inertia resistance
asserts itself. A body might move with more or less freedom through the
vibrating mass, but as a whole it wouid be rigid."
This statement reflects Tesla's prior tests, since, prior to his 1892
lectures in London, he had performed tests between two electrified
plates, stating that the "space" between became "solid state" when
subjected to "sufficiently high voltages and frequencies". This addressed
the issue of how "solid bodies" can pass through a dense, vibrating,
interpenetrating mass of ether which, as a whole is rigid. This is the
essence of how the "inertia resistance" of the underlying 'ether
framework' can be summoned up by an electrified body which activates
the ether with currents of "sufficiently high voltage and frequency". As
the inertial resistance of the ether "asserts itself, the electrified body is
propelled through the ether by MHD thrust, which is really the
"microhelical drills" at work.

The "specially constructed alternator" of which Tesla spoke was a
32-inch diameter one, which if similar to the type used on the saucer I
saw in 1953, was probably driven by one of Tesla's bladeless turbines. In
the 1890's, Tesia said the alternator had produced up to 10 amps and 30
kilocycles. One of these alternators is shown below:

The saucer I saw in 1953 exhibited precessional characteristics
which could have been caused by the use of such an alternator, the
output and rpms of which under the circumstances could have been
varied with the power level of the saucer, as if it were being turned
progressively faster by a turbine as the ship used more power to
accelerate. The high angle and low frequency of the precessions would
be consistent with the use of a high frequency, large diameter alternator,
which was turned more slowly at hovering power, and increased in rpm
for more power as the ship accelerated.
Since the alternator would likely have been attached ridigly to the
airframe of the saucer, it could have caused the entire saucer to precess
at hovering power, while the downward acceleration due to gravity was
being balanced by the upward electropulsive acceleration, as the ship
hovered in place above the earth. This phenomenon showed that the
precession I observed in 1953 was either due to rotating internal
machinery, or to the "virtual" angular momentum created by the
electropulsive effects.
The balanced forces holding the ship in mid-air would have been
equivalent to holding it on "gimbals of air", so that it precessed freely

according to the speed of the rotating alternator's angular momentum
and mass. This would have required very little force, because the
electropulsive forces reduced the ships inertia to almost zero. On the
other hand, the rotatory force which a magnetic field imparts to
electrical current, to create the microhelices, could be the cause of
precession, as an "equal and opposite reaction", by collective rotatory
precessive action imparted to all the atoms of the entire mass of the ship.
Tesla worked out the problem of how to counteract the tendency of
the ship to rotate due to the torque of the alternator or turbine, by using
two turbines or alternators, turned on parallel axes in the same direction
or counter-rotated, as stated in his patent #1,655,114, Apparatus for
Aerial Transportation, Jan. 3, 1928. In fact, a single alternator and
turbine turning on separate , parallel axes, linked by a gear box, would
accomplish the same thing.
As the ship accelerated to full speed and power, its low precessional
rate and high precessional angle became a mere high-frequency wobble,
as the ship shot to infinity in three seconds (which I estimated roughly
7.5 miles). This was consistent with the alternator being turned at a
progressively higher speed. The rapid precessive wobble of the ship's
periphery tended to blur its outline, something which has made it more
difficult to obtain sharp definitions of the profiles of saucers in
photographs and video. Coupled with this physical vibration may be the
"Faraday effect" - the "magneto-optical effect" which tends to blur the
outlines of objects subjected to intense electromagnetic fields. The
extension of the ship's electric field also extends its magnetic field, and
causes a rotation of the optical plane, so in addition to visual effects of
the high frequency precessional oscillations, the optical plane is actually
rotated to create the weird magneto-optical effects so often reported, and
becomes distorted in the minds of the mystics, who think it is some sort
of "time travel" or "interdimensional travel" effect, a "space-warpage"
or "wrapping around" of "time and space" by a "rotating body" as it
moves through space, ala Einstein, except saucers don't "revolve", as
proven by my Peiltochterkompass, and Einstein was full of baloney.
The flying saucer may be powered by a Tesla alternator, a Tesla
coil, or a combination of the two. Tesla stated that the required currents
could be conveyed by conductor, which allows for the instantaneous
control of a ship by means of high voltage stepping switches or relays.
Since an on-board power generator is usually required anyway, the use
of an alternator is more convenient than a spark gap, coil, and condenser

65

combination, since the necessary high frequency alternations can be
easily stepped up to higher voltages by several closely linked "extra"
coils, placed about the ship.
It is possible that a ball-shaped cockpit was used on some of
the German Kreisel Tellers ("Gyrating Saucers") of the 1940's. The
ball- shaped cockpit would have been pressurized, mounted on
gimbals, and gyro-stabilized with a horizontally oriented
Meisterkreiselkompass ("Master-gyro-compass"), which would not
only gyro-stabilize the cockpit while the outer saucer precessed
wildly, but would provide the polar compass heading for the slave
compass:

As the outer ship precessed because the alternator was bolted to
the outer airframe—the inner cockpit would be gyro-stabilized, so the
pilot and crew could have visibility of the outer environment. Even
with a precessional angle of 45 degrees, the pilot would still be able to
see where he was, and where he was going. I could not see the top of
the saucer I saw in 1953, so can't say what the visibility system was.

TESLA'S DYNAMIC THEORY OF GRAVITY
According to Tesla's lecture prepared for the Institute of Immigrant
Welfare (May. 12,1938), his Dynamic Theory of Gravity was one of two
far reaching discoveries, which he "...worked out in all details", in the
years 1893 and 1894. The 1938 lecture was less than five years before his
death.
More complete statements concerning these discoveries can only he
gleaned from scattered and sparse sources, because the papers of Tesla
are concealed in government vaults for "national security" reasons.
When I specifically asked for these papers at the "National Security
Research Center"—now the "Robert J. Oppenheimer Research Center"-
—in 1979,1 was denied access because they were classified, even though
on that same day I discovered the plans for the hydrogen bomb on an
open shelf, and told a Harvard graduate student about it later in the day
at a Santa Fe restaurant. The guy went to Los Alamos, copied the plans,
and wrote an expose at Harvard.
In his 1938 lecture, Tesla said he was progressing with the work,
and hoped to give the theory to the world "very soon", so it was clearly
his intent to "give it to the world", as soon as he had completed his secret
developments.
The "two great discoveries" to which Tesla referred, were:
1. The Dynamic Theory of Gravity - which assumed afield of
force which accounts for the motions of bodies in space; assumption of
this field of force dispenses with the concept of space curvature (ala
Einstein); the ether has an indispensable function in the phenomena (of
universal gravity, inertia, momentum, and movement of heavenly bodies,
as well as all atomic and molecular matter); and,

2. Environmental Energy - the Discovery of a new physical
Truth: there is no energy in matter other than that received from the
environment.
The usual Tesla birthday announcement—on his 79th birthday
(1935)—Tesla made a brief reference to the theory saying it applies to
molecules and atoms as well as to the largest heavenly bodies, and to
"...all matter in the universe in any phase of its existence from its very
formation to its ultimate disintegration".
67

Those imbued with relativist theory often refer to "pure energy" in
some "form", but there is no such thing, since "energy" is an abstract
"ability" which is always in the future. Who's to say what "form" is
"pure", and what form is not?
My favorite philosopher, Ayn Rand, said. "In reality, there are no
contradictions. Things are what they are irrespective as to whether we
know it or not. Check your premises." If the term "energy" is only a
convenient abstraction, then it does not exist in physical form, and really
describes the potential to perform work as a by-product of matter and
electromagnetic radiation in perpetual motion, some of the force of
which has been diverted through a path where it performs the desired
work, as it goes on its merry way through the universe. Every change of
form of either matter or radiation involves the "work" which induces the
change, or the "work" which is induced by the change. Without work
there is no change, but all work is ultimately the product of the universe
in perpetual, self-sustaining motion, as a rule and not an exception.
As for Tesla's theory, we have hints, such as, that the earth is the
"star of human birth". In poetic expressions, he hid scientific meanings

in statements such as, that using the "thunderbolt of Jove" (the Indo-
European sky god), man "annihilates time and space", an allusion to the

use of electro-propulsion ("thunderbolts"), to travel so fast, that time
and space are "annihilated". Where the government has stolen his
papers, we must search for meaning elsewhere. In an article, Man's
Greatest Achievement 1 . Tesla outlined his Dynamic Theory of Gravity in
poetic form (as paraphrased by me):
► That the luminiferous ether fills all space
► That the ether is acted upon by the life-giving creative force
► That the ether is thrown into "infinitesimal whirls"
("micro helices") at near the speed of light, becoming
ponderable matter

► That when the force subsides and motion ceases, matter
reverts to the ether (a form of "atomic decay")

John J. O'Neill, Prodigal Genius, 1944, pp. 251-252
68

► That man can harness these processes, to:
-Precipitate matter from the ether
-Create whatever he wants with the matter and energy
derived
-Alter the earth's size
-Control earth's seasons (weather control)
-Guide earth's path through the Universe, like a space
ship
-Cause the collisions of planets to produce new suns and
stars, heat, and light
-Originate and develop life in infinite forms
Tesla was referring to unlimited energy, derived from the
environment. Several of his major free energy discoveries have been the
exclusive stolen property of our Secret Government. The conversion of
energy to a stronger force—electropulsion—used to control the much
weaker gravity force, would accomplish more work in the same amount
of time, and produce "over unity" results.
Some of Telsa's unusual conceptualization of the ether had been
nonetheless expounded piecemeal, in his preceding 1890's lectures.2
He
later railed against the limited and erroneous theories of Maxwell, Hertz,
Lorentz, and Einstein.
Tesla's ether was neither the "solid" ether with the "tenuity of
steel" of Maxwell and Hertz, nor the half-hearted, entrained, gaseous
ether of Lorentz. Tesla's ether consisted of "carriers immersed in an
insulating fluid", which filled all space. Its properties varied according
to relative movement, the presence of mass, and the electric and
magnetic environment.
Tesla's ether was rigidified by rapidly varying electrostatic forces,
and was thereby involved in gravitational effects, inertia, and
momentum, especially in the space near earth, since, as explained by
Tesla, the earth is "...like a charged metal ball moving through space",
which creates the enormous, rapidly varying electrostatic forces which
diminish in intensity with the square of the distance from earth, just like
gravity. Since the direction of propagation radiates from the earth, the

2
T. C. Martin, Inventions, Researches and Writings of Nicola Tesla, 1894, Chapter XXV - Introduction - The
Scope of the Tesla Lectures.

69

so-called force of gravity is toward earth.
Tesla commenced to complete his Dynamic Theory of Gravity at the
same approximate period of time that his experimental results and
theories had been revealed in the three lectures, often illustrated with
demonstrations using Tesla-invented equipment, as revealed in the
following eight excerpts, in pertinent part (emphasis mine):
1. "The most probable medium filling the space is one consisting of
independent carriers immersed in an insulating fluid".
2. "In his experiments he dwells first on some phenomena produced
by electrostatic force, which he considers in the light of modern theories
to be the most important force in nature for us to investigate."
3. "He illustrates how mechanical motions are produced by a varying
electrostatic force acting through a gaseous medium."
4. "One of the most interesting results arrived at in pursuing these
experiments, is the demonstration of the fact that a gaseous medium upon
which vibration is impressed by rapid changes of electrostatic potential, is
rigid "
5. "If through this medium enormous electrostatic stresses are
assumed to act, which vary rapidly in intensity, it would allow the
motion of a body through it, yet it would be rigid and elastic, although
the fluid itself might be devoid of these properties".
6. "...on the assumption that the independent carriers are of any
configuration such that the fluid resistance to motion in one direction is
greater than in another, a stress of that nature would cause the carriers
to arrange themselves in groups, since they would turn to each other their
sides of the greatest electrical density, in which position the fluid
resistance to approach would be smaller than to receding."
7. "If in a medium of the above characteristics a brush would be
formed by a steady potential, an exchange of the carriers would go on
continuously, and there would be less carriers per unit volume in the
brush than in the space at some distance from the electrode, this
corresponding to rarefaction".
8. "If the potentials were rapidly changing, the result would be very
different; the higher the frequency of the pulses, the slower would be the
exchange of carriers; finally, the motion of translation through
measurable space would cease and, with a sufficiently high frequency
and intensity of the stress, the carriers would be drawn towards the
electrode, and compression would result."
70

The eight above excerpts are further reducible to the following four
statements pertinent to electro-propulsion technology:
1. Mechanical motions can be produced by varying electrostatic
force acting through a gaseous (ether) medium, which thereby becomes
rigidified, yet allows solid bodies to pass through.
2. Under influence of stress in one direction (under the polarizing
influence of light or heat), the carriers may group together, forming
tubes of force, creating greater ease of movement in that direction.
3. When a (D.C.) brush is created by a steady potential, a
continuous exchange of carriers is created corresponding to ether
rarefaction, as the tubes of force are drawn into the conductor.
4. With a sufficiently high frequency and stress intensity in the
opposite direction, carrier exchange is blocked by ether compression,
forcing the tubes of force to dissolve in the conductors of the ship,
imparting electromagnetic momentum. The system, using the two kinds
of potentials (D.C. and A.C.), is known as "p2".
The steady potential of the brush creates the required exchange of
carriers, 'ratifying' (stretching) the elastic, rigidified medium (composed
of the carriers immersed in the insulating fluid) in advance of the ship,
as the high frequency A.C. to the rear compresses them, blocking
exchange from the rear, dissolving the tubes of force (my
"microhelices"), creating instant momentum, normal to the surface
(which is at right angles to the electric and magnetic fields).
In 1884, John Henry Poynting's theorem had been that the flux of
energy at any place is represented by the vector product of the electric
and magnetic forces, multiplied by C/4*PI. 3 This implied that forces in a
conductor could be transformed there into other forms. In 1893, J. J.
Thomson stated practically the same thing, saying "...the aether is itself
the vehicle of mechanical momentum, of amount (1/4*PI*C) (D*B) per unit
volume. 4
(Using e.-s. Units for D and E
and e.-m. Units for B and H.)

3
Phil Trans. clxxv (1884), p. 343.
4 Recent Researches in Elect, and Mag. (1893), p. 13.
71

E = electrical force
D = electrical displacement
H = magnetic force
B = magnetic induction
Heinrich Hertz's theory 5

was that two systems of varying current
should exert a ponderomotive force on each other due to the variations.
Tesla's disagreement was apparently based on the fact that he proved
that the "ponderomotive force" is due not to mere "varying currents",
but to rarefaction and compression of the ether carriers, respectively,
produced by different kinds of currents (D.C., A.C., rapidly varying
electrostatic).
J. J. Thomson6

had extensively developed the theory of the moving
tubes of force, both magnetic and electric, saying that the magnetic effect
was a secondary one created by the movement of electric tubes, and
assumed:
► that tubes exist everywhere in space, either in closed circuits or
terminating on atoms;
► that electric force becomes perceivable only when electric tubes
have greater tendency to lie in one direction;
► that in a steady magnetic field, positive and negative tubes may
move in opposite directions with equal velocity;
► that a beam of light is a group of electric tubes moving at C at
right angles to their length (providing a good explanation for
polarization of the plane of rotation).
Tesla said his "dirigible torpedo" would fly at a maximum 300 miles
per second, perhaps since its forward velocity would be some maximum
fraction of C. Thomson's later publishings on this subject followed
Tesla's 1891 lectures before the Royal Society in London, and appear to
shed light on Tesla's work, stating:
► that a ponderomotive force is exerted on a conductor carrying
electric current, consisting of a transfer of mechanical momentum
from the agent which exerts the force to the body which

5 Ann. d. Phys. Xxxi (1887), p. 421; Hertz's Electric Waves, translated by D.E. Jones, p. 29.
6 Recent Researches in Elect. And Mag. (1893), p. 13.
72

experiences it;
► that, if moving tubes entering a conductor are dissolved in it,
mechanical momentum is given to the conductor;
► that such momentum must be at right angles to the tube and to
the magnetic induction;
► that momentum stored in a unit volume of the field is
proportional to the vector product of electric and magnetic
vectors.
"Thomson's" Electromagnetic Momentum hypothesis was later
developed by H. Poincare7

and by M. Abraham8
.

By 1910, it was said9

that the consequence of these pronouncements

left three alternatives:
1. Modify the theory to reduce to zero the resultant force on an element
of free aether (as with Maxwell, Hertz, and Einstein);
2. Assume the force sets aether in motion (as with Helmholtz);
3. Accept the principle that aether is the vehicle of mechanical
momentum of amount [D-B] per unit volume (as with Poynting and J.
J. Thomson).
Whittaker's greatest error was in omitting Tesla's theory entirely.
After Tesla's experiments verified it, right in front of the esteemed
members of the "Royal Academy", the "three (later) alternatives" were
moot, and a new law existed, that of Tesla.
Tesla's Secrecy
Due to his pacifist sympathies, Tesla originally contemplated giving
his electric flying machine to the Geneva Convention or League of
Nations, for use in 'policing the world' to prevent war. Later
disillusioned after WWI with the collapse of the League, he said he'd
"...underestimated man's combative capacity".10

7 Archives Ne erl (2) v (1900), p. 252.
8 Gott, Nach., 1902, p. 20.
9 Sir Edmund Whittaker, A History of the Theories of the Aether and Electricity, 1910, Edinborough.
10 New York Times, July 10,1934.
73

In 1919, his reason for increased secrecy emerged in an interview
with Frederick M. Kerby, for Resolution magazine, while discussing a
"three-hour" airplane between New York and London: "...we have here
the appalling prospect of a war between nations at a distance of
thousands of miles, with weapons so destructive and demoralizing that
the world could not endure them. That is why there must be no more
war" With the government's spurning of his defense suggestions, Tesla's
only recourse was to withhold his secrets from the world, and to dissuade
discovery in their direction.
In 1929, Tesla ridiculed Heinrich Hertz's 1887-89 experiments
purportedly proving the Maxwellian "structureless" ether filling all
space, "of inconceivable tenuity yet solid and possessed of rigidity
incomparably greater than the hardest steel". Tesla's arguments were to
the contrary, saying he had always believed in a "gaseous" ether in
which he had observed waves more akin to sound waves. He recounted
how he had developed a "new form of vacuum tube" in 1896 (which I
call the "Tesla bulb"), "...capable of being charged to any desired
potential, and operated it with effective pressures of about 4,000,000
volts." He described how purplish coronal discharges about the bulb
when in use, verified the existence of "particles smaller than air", and a
gas so light that an earth-sized volume would weigh only 1/20 pound. He
further said sound waves moved at the velocity of light through this
medium.11
Tesla mentioned using his special tube to investigate cosmic rays12,
saying that when its emanations were impinged upon a target material,
radioactive emissions resulted, and that radioactive bodies were simply
"targets" continuously bombarded by "infinitesimal bullets projected
from all parts of the universe", without which "all radioactivity would
cease." His description of these "bullets" was similar to the ZPR.
On Apr. 15,193213, Tesla said Einstein's theory regarding changing
matter into force, and force into matter, was "absurd". He compared
this to the difference between body and mind, saying force is a

11 New York Herald Tribune, Sept. 22,1929, pp. 1,29.
12 Letter, New York Times, Feb. 6,1932, p. 16, col. 8.
13 Nikola Tesla Papers, Rare Books and Manuscript Library, Columbia University.

74

"...function of matter", and that, just as a mind could not exist without
a body, "...without matter, there can be no force."
On Sept. 11, 1932 (New York Herald Tribune), Tesla derided the
Maxwellian/Hertzian ether, while saying that higher frequency waves
"...follow the curvature of the earth and bend around obstacles", yet in
an Apr. 8,1934 New York Times letter, said that short waves for "power
purposes" of the 'wireless art', were inappropriate, and that power will
travel in "long waves". His 1929 attack on the Maxwellian/Hertzian
ether theory—39 years afterward, during the advent of Relativism—
seemed relevant only to his concealed theory, not to disclose it or
promote it, but to conceal it.
THE NATURE OF ELECTRICITY
What were the old ether physicists referring to when they
attempted to describe "an incompressible, perfect fluid"? What would
a "perfect fluid" do? It would be able to "wet" everything it came into
contact with, such as protons, and could flow everywhere without
resistance. One "fluid"—the ether—could flow everywhere, and because
of its density and ultra-fineness, nothing could stop it, and it felt ao
resistance, but only matter felt resistance, depending on the
circumstances. Another fluid—electricity—could flow in certain places,
and wet only certain things, but often met resistance.
In order to understand the ether, we must get to know electricity
more intimately. Just like water, a proton will hold only so much
electricity on its surface, but the 'surface' of the proton is probably
similar to the outer area of a ball-shaped swarm of hovering mechanical
bees, powered by the ZPR, with a denser agglomeration of "bees"
toward the 'ball's' center. If this swarm of bees is subjected to a wave of
rainy mist (the etheric 'wind'), the bees must all turn to face into the
etheric wind to maintain their formation. The 'water' droplets—electric
sub-charges carried by the etheric wind—tend to agglomerate around
the front side. Each bee, as he flaps his wings, will get wet only so much,
so that excess 'water' is thrown off and carried to the next bee, or the
next swarm of bees, by the etheric wind, and so forth, so that a 'current'
of droplets continues to flow through the ball of bees due to its motion
through the etheric wind, and transfers momentum between masses.
The 'water' tends to come off in larger drops, which have formed
from smaller droplets accumulated on each bee. As in fluid mechanics.

75

the 'drop' size is the result of cohesiveness of the electric 'fluid', the
surface area of each 'bee', and the space between each bee, all of which
influences the final size of each larger 'drop' (the "electron") which
accumulates enough to form it. If one were to mathematically analyze the
flow of "drops" (i.e., "quanta") per mass unit, they would have an
average rate of the flow of charges/cm3

of etheric wind, for the

momentum, as determined by the "current" flow rate.
Much like the bees, as a body (its many electrons, atoms, and
molecules, with plenty of 'space' within and between) sits at rest on the
earth, it moves at fantastic speed through the universal ether field, due
to the earth's revolution, orbit, and other motions.
In his 1891 A.I.E.E. lecture at Columbia College, Tesla said in
pertinent part (emphasis mine): "What is electricity, and what is
magnetism? "...We are now confident that electric and magnetic
phenomena are attributable to the ether, and we are perhaps justified in
saying that the effects of static electricity are effects of ether in motion",
"...we may speak of electricity or of an electric condition, state or effect",
"...we must distinguish two such effects, opposite in character
neutralizing each other", "...for in a medium of the properties of the
ether, we cannot possibly exert a strain, or produce a displacement or
motion of any kind, without causing in the surrounding medium an
equivalent and opposite effect." "...its condition determines the positive
and negative character." "We know that it acts like an incompressible
fluid;" "...the electro-magnetic theory of light and all facts observed
teach us that electric and ether phenomena are identical." "The puzzling
behavior of the ether as a solid to waves of light and heat, and as a fluid
to the motion of bodies through it, is certainly explained in the most
natural and satisfactory manner by assuming it to be in motion, as Sir
William Thomson has suggested." "Nor can anyone prove that there are
transverse ether waves emitted from an alternate current machine; to
such slow disturbances, the ether, if at rest, may behave as a true fluid."
In his statements, Tesla was balancing the various arguments in
preparation for his decision: "...Electricity, therefore, cannot be called
ether in the broad sense of the term; but nothing would seem to stand in
the way of calling electricity ether associated with matter, or bound
ether; or, in other words, that the so-called static charge of the molecule
is ether associated in some way with the molecule."
"...It cannot differ in density, ether being incompressible: it must,
therefore, be under some strain or in motion, and the latter is the most

76

probable." Tesla therefore believed in an ether which was in motion
relative to earth, because the earth is in motion.
The thing which Tesla had realized, was that ether possesses electric
charges which are deposited on atoms. In supporting the "dynamic"
ether concept, he was supporting the "stationary ether" concept, since
the "motion" he referred to was "apparent" motion of the ether
perceived by an observer on earth, relative to a stationary ether.
The importance of cosmic motion to the electromagnetic effects of
static charges was brought up by Tesla in his lecture: "About fifteen
years ago, Prof. Rowland demonstrated a most interesting and important
fact, namely, that a static charge carried around produces the effects of
an electric current." "...and conceiving the electrostatically charged
molecules in motion, this experimental fact gives us a fair idea of
magnetism. We can conceive lines or tubes of force which physically
exist, being formed of rows of directed moving molecules; we can see that
these lines must be closed, that they must tend to shorten and expand,
etc. It likewise explains in a reasonable way, the most puzzling
phenomenon of all, permanent magnetism, and, in general, has all the
beauties of the Ampere theory without possessing the vital defect of the
same, namely, the assumption of molecular currents. Without enlarging
further upon the subject, I would say, that I look upon all electrostatic,
current and magnetic phenomena as being due to electrostatic molecular
forces."
In these statements, Tesla showed he was aware that any
"stationary" locale on earth is actually in fantastic motion ("70,000
mph"). The electrostatic charges "carried around" are currents between
atoms and the ether, which produce magnetism. The phenomena of
'permanent magnetism' or 'cosmically induced' magnetism are
apparently due to electrostatic charges 'carried around' by cosmic
motion, in the universal ether field.
Since no one can hold an atom or molecule perfectly still—because
it is in fantastic motion—all atoms and molecules carry currents
producing magnetic fields. Since a magnetic field is the product of a
current, no one can produce a magnetic field without electricity, moving
through or along a conductor, or as electrostatic charges in local or
cosmic motion.
Tesla's Dynamic Theory of Gravity and MHD method of Spacial
Electropulsion brought a cosmic crowning achievement to the works of
Faraday, Wm. Thomson, J. J. Thomson, and Edmund Hall.

77

CONCLUSION

The ether is a universal medium, which fills all space. It appears to
be "dynamic" relative to an earth moving thousands of miles per hour
through space. The ether is normally electrically neutral, ultra-fine, and
penetrates all solid matter. There is also an ultra high frequency,
ubiquitous radiation, normally in equilibrium, called Zero Point
Radiation ("ZPR"), which interpenetrates the ether, and represents
electromagnetic radiation in its finest, densest form, which, in
conjunction with the ether, conserves universal perpetual motion.
The ether in conjunction with the ZPR, is the source of all matter
and force. "Energy" does not exist in physical form, but is "the ability to
do work", which is equal to "force over time". The word "energy" is a
convenient fiction, like "time", which is an arbitrary measurement of the
rate of motion of matter through ether-filled space. All events occur in
the present, and the "past" and "future" are merely metaphors.
Electromagnetic disturbances in the ether extract "energy" from the
ZPR, which is explainable only by an ether theory. This "free energy",
which is virtually unlimited, is universally at work, created by the
perpetual motion of matter, and the perpetual exchange of stronger and
weaker forces, through which the equilibrium of the universe is
maintained, the sum total of all processes equaling zero.
Since all solid matter is continually hurling through space, always
in motion, it is always subjected to the "etheric wind" and ZPR
interactions. These effects are not perceived except during changes in the
orientation of mass or its velocity. All mass and space have dielectric
properties. Differences in dielectric properties cause changes in the
electromagnetic displacement within mass and the etheric wind. Earth's
electric field creates dielectric displacement effects within ether and mass
within earth's electric field. The difference between the dielectric
displacement within a mass and the dielectric displacement outside the
mass in the etheric wind, creates a down-force in the direction of the
negative polarity, as the etheric wind 'blows' through a mass. This is
called "gravity".
Since all mass is in motion, all mass has momentum, even when
apparently "at rest" relative to earth. Momentum is a body's resistance
to change in its state of motion. Since inertia is also the resistance of
a body to changes in its momentum, inertia and momentum are due to
the same thing, the resistance of electromagnetic micro helical tubules to

78

changes in velocity (and relative "pitch"), direction, and lateral motions
or orientation. Since all space and mass is composed only of "electric
content", momentum/inertia is electromagnetic in nature, and can be
electromagnetically synthesized.
All mass contains electrostatic charges, which when "carried
around" in the ether/ZPR-filled space by celestial or 'local' movement,
constitute currents. These currents actually flow between mass and the
ether, and are integral to the mechanism by which momentum is
imparted to mass in motion. The currents create magnetic fields as their
equal-and-opposite counterparts, and give a rotatory motion to
combined, bi-directional electric and magnetic fields and currents,
around irrotational vacuous ether cores. This rotatory electromagnetic
action creates momentum, as the force-free "screw-type" reaction within
mass, creating its motion relative to the ether cores, from which the
mechanical force is transferred to the atomic mass with which the
electromagnetism is associated.
Since these phenomena are electromagnetic in nature, they are
synthesized by recreation of the electromagnetic conditions which a body
would exhibit due to a particular kinetic state. Just as electromagnetic
waves of low frequency can penetrate a body, waves of higher
frequencies—above LR. and below U.V.—can cause the ether to "assert
its inertia resistance".
The technology involves high voltage D.C. 'brush' currents, high
frequency currents, rapidly varying electrostatic forces, and light/heat
beams. The rapidly varying electrostatic forces "rarify" (stretch) the
ether carriers, as the light/heat beams polarize the medium in the desired
direction, as the D.C. brush currents induce the exchange of carriers,
creating a vacuum in that direction, inducing motion. At the opposite
end of the ship, high frequency currents draw the carriers through the
ship, and creates a compression of the ether, as it penetrates the solid
mass and synthesizes the rotatory micro helical tubules, which whirl
around the ether cores along the polar axis, at a pitch corresponding to
a particular rate of momentum. Since the strength of the
electromagnetic interaction is 1040 time greater than the gravitational
interaction, that much more work can theoretically be done in the same
time, using the same "energy".
Since "seeing is believing", and I have seen, I believe. The behavior
of man-made flying saucers proves the existence of these "free energy"
inventions of Nikola Tesla, which show that he was right in his

79

opposition to Relativism, and that the prevalent theories taught in the
scientific institutions of the world are patently fraudulent.
Consistent with the idea that "dynamite comes in small packages",
this small book, along with my prior book, Space Aliens From the
Pentagon, initiates the rediscovery, reconstruction and publication of
Nikola Tesla's Dynamic Theory of Gravity and related electropulsion
technology, the greatest invention of mankind.

The Secret Government—a fraudulently concealed,
unconstitutional, corporate-state entity—has heretofore controlled
electropulsion technology by concealing it and other advanced free
energy technology, on behalf of international, coercive, corporate-state
monopolists. Electropulsive ships are concealed through "special effects",
and "stealth technology" (also based on Nikola Tesla's inventions)—as
they fly and hover in the sky, and by "psycho-political" means—the
dissemination of false "alien" and "extraterrestrial origin" propaganda—
-through "UFOlogy" groups led by covert government agents. While
official government spokesmen deny the existence of flying saucers,
covert government agents, posing as "skeptics", "UFOlogists", and
"paranormalists", engage the public's attention in a phony debate. The
"skeptics" ridicule the UFOlogists and paranormalists, lumping them
together with rational witnesses, as if "...to see a flying saucer" is as
ridiculous as "...to see a ghost or alien". This phony debate based on
false logic fits nicely into the overall cover-up system, designed to conceal
"advanced human technology", not "alien" technology.
The grip of this secret socio-economic dictatorship, depends on
coercively extorted income, by forcing us to buy archaic fuel and power-
—which funds their control of our communications, political and
monetary decisions, enforcement of unjust laws, regulations, and
procedures expanding its powers, while limiting or excluding our
individual human rights, and denying our access to information,
materials, and technology which is ours because we paid for it with our
taxes. Our access to the truth is necessary for our independence and
survival as a free people.
Despite the confusion, concealment, BIG LIES, and judicial and
socio-economic abuse by the corporate state, we can resurrect the
TRUTH, determine the correct technology, circumvent obstructions, and
use our creative ingenuity to build these ships for ourselves, to free our
society from the Secret Fascist Corpocracy.

Chapter VI: FREE ENERGY MASSACRE:
The Atomic Hydrogen Process
©1996, WM. R LYNE

What better way to end a book on "Occult Ether Physics", than
with a chapter on another concealed "free energy" process, which
appears to extract energy from the ether—using similar techniques on
the same substance that makes Tesla's electro-propulsion possible?
In SPACE ALIENS, I specified a free energy process in which
helium is made to produce 460,000 calories/gram-atom, by simple spark
discharge, which is based on data from numerous generally available
texts and scientific encyclopedias. This is the highest energy output I
know of from a noble gas, and the same gas can be used ad infinitum, the
only input energy being that required for spark discharges. Since helium
is inappropriate for the average "Joe", and since the output is probably
more than you could handle, I will more appropriately show you how to
perform another free energy process, using that most easily accessible
gas, hydrogen. I will also give you the explanation for the heat produced
in so-called "cold fusion", and a few other free energy processes, all
closely related to the atomic hydrogen process and occult ether physics.
Over the years, the "Relativistic Quantum Mechanics" (hence,
"RQMs") concealed every process or reaction which could show the
invalidity of their theories, "...in the interest of national security". Their
false theories actually became one of the most important means by
which, from the standpoint of the government's secret agencies, that
"national secrets" were concealed, while at the same time, from the
standpoint of the controlling corporate fascists, all 'dangerously efficient'
technology which would destroy their iron grip on us, could be
concealed. According to deceitful relativist quantum mechanics, all
energy coming out of a reaction, must go into the reaction, only from a
"non-ether" source recognized by them, and only in the discrete
"quanta" permitted by their misapplication of Max Planck's earlier
quantum theory. The basic idea of Planck's original quantum mechanical
theory, was that energy levels of atoms must change in whole number
integers (1,2,3, etc.), called "quanta", which are based on the basic
charge of a single electron, which assumes only certain assigned energy
levels in different atoms and molecules, and is used to define the
magnitude of all of the smallest, intermediate, and largest possible energy
changes of atoms and molecules. All atomic energy changes must

81

conform to the permissible whole number equivalents or multiples of
these quanta. Accordingly, energy absorbed by an atom must fit this
stringent criterion. Despite what I consider to be obvious attempts to
conceal basic physical data conflicting with this principle—as
misinterpreted by the Relativists and incorporated into their theory, as
if it were exclusively their theory and not that published earlier by
Planck—the process I am about to discuss with you has glaring
inconsistencies in it, even as described and mis-measured by the
Relativists. It is said by them that the process of dissociating diatomic
hydrogen molecules into separate atoms as atomic hydrogen, requires
the absorption of 109,000 cal./gram molecule ("1.9 k.cal./gram
molecule"). Yet, in taking the basic hydrogen atom and considering all
its discrete 'quanta'—whether in the atomic or molecular state—it
appears to me that there is no state of the hydrogen atom or molecule in
which such energy could be "stored", even when using the RQMs'
theories, especially in view of their irrational statement that the energy
is still possessed by the molecule after it has already been released! It is
their contention that an independent hydrogen atom can only exist as
such because it has absorbed an abnormally large amount of heat,
despite the fact that by their own criteria the atom has no mechanism,
identifiable by them by which it could do so. When two such hydrogen
atoms come together with the presence of sufficient initiation energy, the
great amount of heat said by the Relativists to be stored in the hydrogen
atom is liberated. The RQMs never directly measured the amount of
dissociation energy necessary to bring the hydrogen atom from the
diatomic to the atomic state, because they didn't know how to do so, but
because their theory said that "all reactions are reversible", they said the
dissociation energy was the same as the energy released on
recombination of hydrogen atoms. Then to make matters worse, they
defined the atomic hydrogen (ground) state as if it were an excited state,
and the molecular state as if it were the ground state.
Realistically, the atomic hydrogen reaction can only be satisfactorily
explained by reference to, construction of, or re-construction of, an
ether theory. While it may be arguable that the "binding energy"
between the two atoms of the molecule somehow 'includes' this energy
in some undefined and mysterious way, this argument actually supports
an ether theory, because the binding energy must somehow be
exchanged with the energy which is released when the molecule forms,
consistent with the equal and opposite reaction rule. Otherwise, one is

82

expected to believe a kind of backwards Orwellian doublethink kind of
thing that the RQMs have perpetrated, since "...everything is like
relative, man." This kind of latitude is permitted only for them, while
those who disagree are held to a higher standard.
The doublethink features of Relativism stem from the fact that
Albert Einstein was a Kaballist-Existentialist—and an Illuminist—whose
epistemology was a Platonist one. In philosophy, there are two basic
epistemologies—theories of the origin, nature and limits of human
knowledge—representing the two basic categories into which the
epistemologies of all philosophies must fall, and which are supposed to
explain how one knows something according to a particular
philosophy...by what means they know it...if in fact, they do "know" it.
Since he who asserts something has the burden of proving it, rather
than one who disbelieves it, the means by which it is purportedly
known, may come into question. No one is legally, morally, or
'spiritually' obligated to believe anything, without reason, or a valid
means of knowing it to be "true". All epistemologies are classified as
either Platonist, or Aristotelian.
The "Platonist Epistemology" is so named because of the theory
illustrated by the cave analogy, in the ancient Greek Philosopher, Plato's
book, The Republic. In Plato's cave analogy, an observer inside a cave,
facing the inner wall at night, sees only the shadows cast upon the wall
by such things as a passing caravan, projected by a fire burning beyond
a road along which a caravan is passing. According to Plato, man cannot
know reality, but sees only a 'shadow' of reality, because there is a
'higher world' of 'perfect forms', which exist only 'in heaven'. It
therefore becomes obvious how this epistemology follows religious
thinking, and that many religions have been influenced by it as somehow
adding 'scientific credence' to their religious ideas, which are based on
faith rather than reason. The same reasoning has been used by scientific,
philosophical, economic, political, and 'spiritual' con-artists for
centuries, and every totalitarian philosophy ever known has relied upon
this fallacious 'reasoning' which is identical to the Platonist
epistemology. One wonders how the viewer in Plato's cave would draw
the line between 'knowing' a shadow, and a "shadow of a shadow", since
a shadow might also have a 'higher form', under this theory.
The "Aristotelian Epistemology" in the meanwhile—based on the
ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle's theory—holds that the senses are
valid, scientific tools of cognition, which we can rely upon, to detect the

83

facts of perceivable reality, and that we can, by relying upon the facts so
perceived, know reality and determine other, perhaps unperceivable
facts of reality.
As can be seen from a comparison of these two epistemologies and
their implications, the philosophies and endeavors based on the Platonist
Epistemology are mystical flaky, and/or totalitarian, while the
philosophies and endeavors relying on the Aristotelian Epistemology are
more rational and objective, especially when applied to the natural
sciences. It can also be seen that the use of a Platonist Epistemology by
a physicist should be considered unforgivable, while Einstein's theory,
built upon this fatally flawed epistemology, has been popularized by the
communication monopoly controlled by the power-elite, because it
makes a potentially inquisitive and questioning society dumber and
easier to control. Einstein's image is continually built up as if that of an
ultimate and infallible creature who should be regarded as a 'god'. This
propaganda not only protects the false theory, but also aids in
concealment of valid theory and advanced technology which would end
the reign of a world-wide power structure of corporate-statists, who
think society already has all the technology it 'needs', else the elite's
'grip' on the world, held in place by their archaic technology which
exploits mineral, industrial, and banking interests owned by them, might
be torn loose.
I would have very little quarrel with a quantum theory of atomic
energy levels, were it extended to include an ether theory, as it should
have been logically construed, but I take issue with its present
development, limitation, and misapplication by the RQMs. My position
is that they already have applied it to an ether theory, that this
application is well concealed, and that this book is needed to begin the
reconstruction of these concealed truths, for use by the public. While
Planck said his quantum theory applied to a "system", he didn't say the
Relativist's "system"—which came into existence after his theory—was
the only system it could be applied to. Since a rationally extended
quantum mechanical theory would not exclude an ether, my "RQM"
label distinguishes between the relativistic misinterpreters of quantum
mechanics, and what could be called the "Integrated Reality Mechanics"
("IRMs").
The atomic hydrogen reaction first came to my attention in 1964,
when I was studying industrial processes at Sam Houston State
University, in Huntsville, Texas, the year after taking an introductory

84

course in college physics. While reviewing various welding processes in
a textbook, my eyes fixed on an older process called "atomic hydrogen
welding". By that time, the process was already considered "obsolete".
To me, the process seemed valuable, not only because it produces such
high temperatures—above 3400° F.—enough to melt tungsten—the
highest temperatures producible by man—but is also "self-shielding",
and can be used to weld diverse metals, often without flux, with a
concentrated flame producing little heat distortion, when welding thin
metal. In the process, 'normal' diatomic H2 is shot through an electric
arc which dissociates it into "atomic" hydrogen, H1. This atomic
hydrogen recombines at the (welded) metal surface, producing the very
high heat Though the process interested me then, and always has, I have
never seen an atomic hydrogen welding unit for sale, for the 31 years
hence. Industry's obvious excuse for laying the valuable process aside
was that it had been 'replaced' by 'better' processes, such as Heliarc,
TIG, and MIG welding, though they rarely mention "plasma arc
welding", which has also almost disappeared from the market. Since
plasma arc welding is merely an extension of the atomic hydrogen
process, using a specially redesigned torch, the 'mysterious' reasons are
undoubtedly the same.
The process simmered in the inner recesses of my mind for a few
years until 1976, when I rekindled my interest in the process for possible
use in welding stainless steel and reducing and fusing platinum metal
compounds, because hydrogen reduces such compounds (which must
also be shielded from oxygen) to metals. The atomic hydrogen process
does not rely upon the combustion of hydrogen with oxygen in the air,
but upon the "atomic" energy released when atomic hydrogen
recombines to form the 'normal', diatomic hydrogen. I still had some
unanswered questions, since the various welding data at my disposal
failed to mention sufficient specific details. If Nikola Tesla was right,
then I am right, that the energy comes from the ether.
Because I knew of no source from which to purchase an atomic
hydrogen torch, I decided to build one, but my information was
inadequate for proper construction. In the torch I made, the hydrogen
gas entered the arc concentrically, around both electrodes, instead of
passing through the arc at a right angle. I also used the wrong kind of
arc transformer, so it didn't work as well as it should have.
Despite the disappointment, I knew the torch would work better if
I corrected the problems, so I kept the torch in my barn until better

85

information and sufficient time was available. I excited the curiosity of
the industrial spooks, when I rented a large tank of hydrogen at a local
welder's supply, and this probably contributed to the sudden
acceleration of the CIA-maintained judicial harassment I endured
between 1974 and 1992 (18 years). They apparently assumed I was
exploring the process for its energy potential, rather than for just
welding, and they were correct. My torch is shown below:

In the '70s, I had acquired an old English inorganic chemistry
textbook1
, purchased from Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory salvage for
S.25, which contained a halftone photo of a '30s-vintage atomic
hydrogen welding torch, along with some basic data. The torch shown
was different from the one I constructed, in that it used a high voltage
arc transformer, and had no mechanism to strike the arc electrodes
together to start the arc, because the high voltage made it unnecessary.
It also showed the gas passing at right angle through the arc. In this old
textbook, it was stated at page 170 (emphasis mine), as follows:
"Langmuir (1912) discovered that hydrogen at low pressure in contact with
a tungsten wire heated by an electric current is dissociated to some extent
into atoms:".... 'This absorbs a large amount of energy, about 100 kcal
Per gram-molecule. " "... The atomic hydrogen formed is chemically very
active. Atomic hydrogen is formed when an electric arc between tungsten
electrodes is allowed to burn in hydrogen at atmospheric pressures (Fig
106)".
The text continued:
"Atomic-hydrogen blown out of the arc by a jet of molecular hydrogen
across the arc, forms an intensely hot flame, capable of melting tungsten
(m. Pt. 3400 °). This flame obtains its heat from recombination of
hydrogen atoms to H2."

86

"Hydrogen being set free in a chemical reaction is often more reactive
than hydrogen gas."
"...the activity of such nascent (newborn) hydrogen, in the act of
liberation from Us compounds, is due to the hydrogen being in the atomic
state."
The following is a copy of "fig. 106":

In checking this data in a more recent Van Nostrand's

Encyclopedia of Science2

, at page 1311 it was stated in pertinent part:

"Hydrogen molecules dissociate to atoms endothermically at high

temperatures (heat of dissociation about 103 cal/gram mole) in an electric-
arc, or by irradiation." "...the hydrogen atoms recombine at the metal

surface to provide heat required for welding."
I was surprised to find this in the Van Nostrand encyclopedia, but
I also found that in 1910, the D. Van Nostrand Company published a
book by Haller and Cunningham, entitled The High Frequency Coil,
(The construction of a Tesla Coil for the advanced amateur. 119 pages),
so there is a record of sorts, of Van Nostrand's association with Tesla.

SMOKESCREENS FROM ACADEMIA

It seemed odd to me that it was later suggested that the 103 calories
of dissociation energy absorbed from a very brief exposure to the arc is
the same heat as that "...required for welding" as described, and I
believed it to be more reasonable that the excess heat had to come from
"elsewhere". The dissociation energy would be analogical to a slice of
bread (@4 cal. gram), and the gross output would be equivalent to 60
loaves of bread (@1814 cal. lb.), calorie-wise. There was too much
disparity between the two, with plenty of suspicious omissions and
confusions, in an obvious attempt to cover up the truth in between.
The older text showed the clearer construction of a device, and the
newer text showed that only 103 cal./gram mole were required for
dissociation, while the older text showed that 100,000 cal./gram mole
were liberated on recombination. Only by jumping back and forth
between the two sources was I able to put a complete documentation
together, and discover the conflicts.
It was apparent from the newer text, that the writers intended for
us to believe that the final 100 k.cal./gram molecule heat—later upped
to 109 k.cal/gram molecule—was absorbed from the arc, but the 103
cal./gram molecule dissociation heat figure showed a net 108,897
cal./gram molecule unexplained. If there are about 65 cubic centimeters
per mole of hydrogen at its critical volume, it seemed highly unlikely
that sufficient energy to weld could be absorbed from the 'dissociating
arc', during the time required for 65 cubic centimeters of gas to pass
from the orifice and through the arc.
109,000 cal./gram mole equals 432.6 BTU/gram mole— roughly the
heat energy contained in 60 loaves of bread—the "extra heat energy"
which they have asked us to believe is 'stored' in an amount of atomic
hydrogen which weighs l/28th of an ounce, during its brief passage
through the arc! How could the transformer produce that much energy,
especially when it uses only half what it does in conventional welding
processes? It seems more likely that excess heat could be stored in
molecules than in 'almost naked' atomic hydrogen atoms. What ever
happened to Bohr's little atom! It got bigger, and bigger, and ........
Between the older text (1921-1950, from the first and sixth editions)
and the newer (1976) Norton science encyclopedia, it was obvious that
science was much more straightforward in the pre-National Security Act
days, and that in the newer text, there was a reflection of the fishy

88

attempts, brought on by the national security laws and the firmer
establishment of the RQMs, to conceal certain scientific knowledge
which had been discovered all the way back in 1912 by Langmuir. Aside
from the discrepancies between older measurements, regarding the
comparable outputs between the combustion of gasoline and the
combustion of molecular hydrogen, and the output from the atomic
hydrogen process, to the newer text, there was a failure, so far as I could
determine, to state under appropriate references (or any others I could
find), some important facts concerning atomic hydrogen, and even
misrepresentations of the actual comparative outputs of gasoline and
hydrogen combustion, through gobbledegook—the "badge of fraud"—
of which I spoke in Space Aliens. Norton apparently was forced by
circumstances to rely on some 'scientists' who represented the fossil fuel
cartels and other conflicting interests, while the older text was relatively
free of such influences.
For example, in the newer text, at page 1311, energy from the
combustion of hydrogen was stated at 29,000 calories per gram ( 52,200
BTU/lb). In the older text, this value was given at 62,100 BTU per pound
of hydrogen, with a comparative value for gasoline ("petroleum") at
19,800 BTU per pound (stretched to 20,825 BTU per pound in the newer
encyclopedia). These figures roughly comported with those in the
encyclopedia for n-Heptane ("gasoline") at 19,314 BTU/lb, and hydrogen
at 51,571.4 BTU/lb, which are more or less repeated at page 1137, with
n-Heptane at 10,737.2 cal./gram, and Hydrogen at 28,669.6 cal./gram,
yet nowhere in the newer text was the total output from atomic hydrogen
given that I could find, and nowhere in the newer or older texts was it
affirmatively stated that the hydrogen was not "consumed" in the
process.
The corrected figure (52,200 BTU/lb) shows, in a comparison
between the combustion of "normal hydrogen" (to form H2O or water)
and gasoline (to form CO2), that hydrogen has a yield of roughly 2.7
times that of gasoline, by weight. Then we come to a comparison between

gasoline and atomic hydrogen. Though the two can be compared BTU-
for-BTU and pound-for-pound, showing atomic hydrogen's phenomenal

output, the real measure of the atomic hydrogen process is gleaned only
from a comparison between the "input energy"—103 cal./gram molecule-
~and the net output. The "input energy" would be "unity" for the
process, because the process does not 'consume' the hydrogen, but only
returns it to its associated state as H2. The dissociation energy,

89

subtracted from the gross output, would be the net output:
109,000 cal/gram mole (gross heat output)
Minus - 103 cal/gram mole (dissociation energy = "Unity")
Leaves - 108,897 cal/gram mole (net output - "Over-Unity"
because the hydrogen didn't have that
much calorific energy in the first place,
and was not 'consumed' in the second place)
In the atomic hydrogen process, hydrogen is not really a "fuel", but
rather a "medium" used in the extraction of and conversion of energy
from the ether, by transforming invisible radiation and electrical energy
into infrared (heat) radiation. The energy required to pump the
recombined hydrogen to a holding tank, before being recycled and shot
back across the arc and into the reaction chamber once again, is not
considered in this computation. This energy should be negligible, since
the dissociation energy is barely more than a thousandth of the gross
output, and there is probably a way to make the process work without
a pump anyway.
The manipulators of information have both lied and made the
direct comparison between atomic hydrogen and gasoline as difficult as
possible, but I have waded through a multi-step mathematical, physical,
chemical and unitary process to get to the truth. Atomic hydrogen
produces over 109 k.cal./gram molecule, which is 109,000 k.cal./kilo.
Minus the 103 cal./gram mole endothermic dissociation energy, and a net
of 108,897 k.cal./kilo is left. A kilo equals 2.205 lbs., so a pound equals
453.51 grams. You must divide the net cal./kilo by lb./kilo to get cal./lb.,
then multiply this times °F/°C (1.8) to get °F/lb. This is then divided by
grams/lb. to get 196,015 BTU/lb. The gross is 196.200 btu/lb. In
comparison to 19,314 BTU/lb for n-Heptane, atomic hydrogen has 10.5
times the energy per pound (of H1 per gal. of H2O). There is an easier
mathematical process, but this shows more clearly what I did.
No wonder the process "went out of use". With this process, a home
consumer would pay nothing for fuel, because he could produce a small
amount of hydrogen in his basement, any time he needed it, and could
use it over and over, ad infinitum. He could heat his house, drive his car,
and use it for "home-industrial", uses. In a motor cruiser on the ocean,
one would never have to worry about where the "next gallon" of fuel was
coming from, or what it would "cost", because like sunshine, the heat

90

from atomic hydrogen is "free", except, unlike sunshine, you could
produce as much as you want, any time, day or night, summer or winter,
rain or shine; the farmer would no longer be dependent upon the oil
cartels for his energy, and could run his machinery and heat his barns
"free". He could tell the fuel suppliers and the banks to screw themselves.
People in the far Alaskan north could heat large spaces without huge
expense. "Northern industry" would thrive again. The population
control Nazis will hate me.
It is obvious that the reason corporations like ARCO went so
heavily into producing solar energy equipment in the early '70s, was so
they could control and ultimately raise the cost of (free) solar energy, to
make it "competitive" with gasoline and other fossil fuels.
There are many ways used in contemporary texts to confuse facts,
but the most effective way is by complete omission. Such facts could not
have been concealed by "accident" or mere "oversight", because they are
too phenomenal. Only by plowing through a tortuous mathematical
process and confusing units and other factors was the true motive for
such concealment revealed for certain, but tell me why I'm not
surprised?
Conservatively speaking, the atomic hydrogen process bears a 10.5-
to-1 ratio to n-Heptane. Would you care for 315 miles per gallon? How
about 550,000 miles? It all depends on how many times you recycle it.
The figures for n-Heptane are grossly confusing, as one might
expect, since it is shown only by comparison by weight that hydrogen
combustion has a 2.7-to-l ratio to n-Heptane. This deception was
effected by playing around with differing heat and weight units,
pressures, and volumes, and the difference between the centigrade and
Fahrenheit scales. The "109,000 cal./gram molecule" figure for atomic
hydrogen was omitted from the newer text, though one might have been
able to extrapolate it from some complex data stated in other areas
where the inquisitive person is not expected to look. There was a total
absence in the new text or other "new" data available to me, of a direct
comparison of energy outputs between combustion of petroleum and
hydrogen, much less the atomic hydrogen process.
I have never seen a direct comparison by any of the thousands of
Ph.D.s in chemistry or physics, who should have become aware of these
facts during their cursory studies. To make these figures even more
ludicrous, with BTU ("British Thermal Units"), one would expect the

weight to be shown in kilos under the metric system, instead of the non-
91

metric "pounds". These machinations clearly appear to rely upon the
well-founded assumption that all scientists who know, are controlled and
don't say, and those who aren't controlled, will be considered "quacks"
if they try. to say. Again, its the usual case of "Those who know, can't
say, and those who say, will be presumed not to know."
Another stupid trick used is to compare "system weights", under
the false assumption that the user of hydrogen would have to use only
the systems they present, raising the "comparable" weight of hydrogen
to gasoline, using cumbersome cryogenic bottles or hydride storage
tanks, etc., when the simple figures clearly show that one-third the
amount by weight of hydrogen would be needed for a comparable
combustion process. Whenever hydride systems are mentioned, there is
an obvious omission of the liquid hydride system developed by Dr.
Gerald Schafflander of California, the promotion for which Schafflander
and associates were abusively prosecuted by the SEC, as previously
stated in Space Aliens. Yet, the atomic hydrogen process would be more
than adequate—even fantastic—with only a pound of hydrogen, and one
could carry an extra 25 lbs of Dr. Schafflander's liquid hydride in the
trunk. Below is a direct comparison between the BTU/lb for combustion
of gasoline and molecular hydrogen, and the atomic hydrogen process,
respectively:

Gasoline combustion (n-Heptane) 19,314 BTU/lb
Hydrogen combustion (H2 + O) 52,200 BTU/lb
Atomic hydrogen (H2<--->2H) 196,200 BTU/lb
Note that the atomic hydrogen process does not involve a
"consumption" of the hydrogen, yet even if it did, the ratio between
atomic hydrogen and gasoline is still 10.5-to-one. Take into consideration
also that all the best methods for obtaining over a hundred miles per
gallon (even hundreds of miles per gallon) of gasoline in automobile
engines, utilize the vaporization of gasoline and mixture of it with air
prior to combustion, something which is easier to do with hydrogen,
because it is in a gaseous state at normal temperatures and pressures.
Also consider that while n-Heptane is a 'purer' gasoline, it hasn't been
available for years, and most "gasoline" is a dilute mixture with water
and various additives, with only about 50% n-Heptane, so I'm being as
kind as I can be to "gasoline".
If a pound of gasoline could propel a car 30 miles, the consumption

92

would be 666.6 BTU/mile. On the same scale, a pound of atomic
hydrogen would yield 315 miles. Then you could repeat it, over and over
and over. A pound of hydrogen could conceivably supply all your energy
needs for your whole life, and you could produce another 100 pounds of
it electrolytically, right in your basement, from tap water! Is this free
energy, or what?!
Though the facts of this "secret" hydrogen process are "hidden in
plain sight", one must beware of the disinformation, as well as the
common mistakes created by "scientists" who have been duped by the
RQMs. For example, in the 1976 Norton Encyclopedia, 5th Edition, page
1311, most of the pertinent facts about hydrogen are shown. The
"109,000 cal./gram molecule" for recombined hydrogen, reported in an
older text, was not shown directly, though the following facts which were
shown, are of particular note:
Heat of vaporization at 20.4° K 107 cal/gram
Energy released upon combustion 29,000 cal/gram
Heat of combustion at 25°C 63,317.4 cal/gram mole - gross
Heat of combustion at 25 °C 57,791.6 cal/gram mole - net
ANOTHER ASTOUNDING PROOF AND MORE HYDROGEN

METHODS

The Norton encyclopedia was in its 5th edition, and the "103
cal./gram mole" dissociation energy did not appear to be a typo or
misprint, and should have been corrected by that time if discovered.
How many books would I have to search to find such a 'misprint',
especially since I didn't expect to find the anomaly because of the
obvious concealment? Yet, in Physical Chemistry (1965) by E. A.
Moelwyn-Hughes of Cambridge (Pergamon Press, London), at page 418,
appeared the following:

"The Spectroscopic evaluation of the dissociation energy
The energy of dissociation, De of a diatomic molecule is the
difference between the potential energy of the atoms when infinitely
separated, and their energy when the atoms are at rest at the equilibrium
separation."

Notice that the "at rest" state of the molecules, is couched in
language that makes you think that the "infinitely separated" atomic
hydrogen atoms represents the "excited state" for the element. In
layman's terms, the RQMs simply made the statement that the
dissociation and recombination energies had to be the same, because
their theories depended upon them being the same. Then they measured
the dissociation energy backwards, by measuring the recombination
energy, and stating the measurement as if it were the dissociation energy.
The statements are supplanted by a lot of RQM gobbledegook, with a
"spectroscopic evaluation" thrown in like some snake oil, because the
spectroscope purportedly "can't lie". There is also in the same text, at
page 417, the following obtuse statement:

"...In kilocalories per mole, De is 109."

If hydrogen atoms exothermically release energy when they combine
to form molecules, the potential energy has been lost by the molecules,
yet they attribute the "potential energy" to the hydrogen molecules—
backwards—to evade their duty to draw the logical conclusion. This lie
is shown by a graph ("fig. 4") purporting to show the "potential energy
of the hydrogen molecule in the ground electronic state." This clearly
misrepresents, by a Ph.D. in physics of the "Royal Society", that
hydrogen in the "atomic state" is not in a ground state, but in an excited
state. In this 1965 physical chemistry text from England, the heat energy
generated on recombination of the hydrogen atom is given as 109,000
cal./gram mole, then misrepresented as the "potential energy" of the
"ground state hydrogen molecules" which have just formed! But the
"ground state" of hydrogen is the atomic state, with the electron at its
lowest level of energy, so the RQMs are hoist by their own petards, since
there is no way the ground state atoms could "store" the 109,000
cal./gram molecule. Where, exactly would this energy "reside"?
Concurrently, this same figure is falsely equated with the heat generated
exothermally when two hydrogen atoms—each in its "excited state"—
come together to form a molecule. Since the heat energy is released on
recombination, the molecules lack the potential energy already released.
The potential energy of the separate atoms in their ground states, is
greater than that of the molecules, because the heat energy is released
from the entrained ether and converted ZPR—not from the hydrogen
atoms—when they combine to form molecules.
94

This is hereby unmasked as Orwellian doublethink. Since when is
the potential energy of the atom of an element measured from its
molecular state? This is exactly like saying that a truck sitting at the
bottom of a hill has more "potential energy" than one sitting at the top,
because of the energy required to drive it up to the top of the hill! What
a strange way to define "potential energy". It is like saying an empty gas
can has the potential energy of the gas that it takes to fill it up!
The unique thing about the hydrogen atom, is that it is "born" at
the top of the hill! Its astounding properties lie in its ability to perform
as a "doorway" between the ether and the world of more familiar atomic
matter.
The relativist statements have been unwittingly accepted as correct,
because there is no ether or Zero Point Radiation possible under their
theories, and the molecules have to have more energy than the atoms
separately, because "E = MC2

". The RQMs have misrepresented and
concealed this process in which separate atoms—with lower MASS—
possess more "atomic" energy than the molecules! Ha! These facts on
hydrogen show that E equals MUCH MORE THAN MC2
.

Under relativism and quantum mechanics, "solid" matter is thought
erroneously to be the most "compact", "stored" form of "atomic
energy", because the energy is supposed to be released by the
"smashing" and destruction, or fusing together of atoms, which Tesla
said was false. It is clearly shown by the atomic hydrogen reaction that
Tesla was right and the relativists and Einstein were wrong, because the
hydrogen atoms have more potential energy in a separate atomic state
than they do in the diatomic molecular state! This can only be either
because when separate, the atoms "gather" energy from the ZPR, and
eject it from the ether when recombined! In either case, the energy is not
stored by the atoms, and no longer possessed by the molecules after
release, unless there is an even greater lie hiding in the relativist bushes.
This perverse potential energy fallacy is also a way to confuse the
diatomic hydrogen molecules with the nascent atomic hydrogen atoms
produced by the hydrolysis of water. The energy of hydrolysis is equated
with the energy of dissociation, and the energy of combustion with the
energy of recombination, yet the information presented here shows that
by combining the hydrolysis of water, in which atomic hydrogen is
produced directly, with the atomic hydrogen recombination process,
instead of the combustion process—and perhaps throwing the oxygen
away—that at least 10.5 times as much energy as the hydrolytic input

95

can be produced, in still a third astounding hydrogen free energy
process. This is true because the atomic hydrogen process without
question releases at least 3.75 times the BTUs by weight, as ordinary
hydrogen does in the combustion process. Even the relativists agree that
the "energy of combustion" equals at least the "energy of hydrolysis"
(even though it is well known that the industrial production of hydrogen
by electrolysis is generally 120% efficient). Production of atomic
hydrogen directly by hydrolysis, which cuts out a separate dissociation
operation, is yet another exciting possibility. It does not expend the
electrical equivalent of 109,000 cal./gram molecule (to produce only 65
cubic centimeters of hydrogen gas).

HOW DOES IT WORK?

As a "welding process", this process was 'obsolesced' by MIG and
TIG welding, neither of which can compare to its welding efficiency and
uses. Since the welding process was its only "public" use in the years
past, the "new" processes allowed industry to toss the "obsolete" process
onto the junk heap (except for their own 'secret' use of it). The "new"
processes were promoted by U-Know-Who, motivating their welding
suppliers and the electric power companies at their own levels. More
archaic tanks, transformers, gauges, torches, electrodes, gases, fluxes,
and electric power, etc., etc., to be sold at a hefty profit. If people
generate their own hydrogen for welding at home, how much equipment,
supplies and power will they buy?
How does the atomic hydrogen obtain its energy, if not from the
"ether"? No wonder establishment science doesn't want you to know
there is an ether. If we are to believe the "law of conservation of energy",
as interpreted by establishment (relativistic, ether-excluding) 'science',
this process is impossible, yet using data available from 'standard' texts,
I have shown that the input energy of 103 cal./gram molecule is somehow
either 'magnified' to 109,000 cal./gram molecule of hydrogen—a
multiplication of over 1,058 times—or that, by use of hydrogen as a
"medium", that the 103 calories is 'seed' energy (called the "activation
energy"), triggering the atomic hydrogen's apprehension of a net
108,897 cal./gram molecule, from the "ether".
An equally phenomenal "atomic helium" process (reported in Space
Aliens) is 4.6 times this output. It can be conducted the same way, and
produces the same kind of electrical energy and radiation-to-heat energy

96

transformation, in which "mass" is only a "medium" used in the process.
The same principles are shared by the Atomic Hydrogen Process, by
Josef Papp's Method and Means of Converting Atomic Energy into
Utilizable Kinetic Energy (Patent No. 3,670,494, of June 20, 1972), and
several other discoveries mentioned here. If these processes used as much
electrical energy as they produced, and electrical energy was the end
product sought, what would be the use of the processes, right? At the
comparable 30 mpg for n-Heptane, helium could produce 42.86 times as
much, or about 1285.8 miles per pound.
According to Van Nostrand's Scientific Encyclopedia, 5th ed., Van
Nostrand Reinhold Co. (1976), simple electron bombardment of helium
gas, in a special chamber, excites the helium atom to a temporarily
radioactive isotope of extremely short half-life. In this state, the helium
atom unpairs its electrons, promotes one electron to the 2s state (in
which state it remains for only a very short time), and afterward releases
460,000 cal/gram-atom (per gram of helium), on collapse of the excited
atom back to its ground state. The heat is in the form of photons. This
is similar to the process for atomic hydrogen, as illustrated by my
drawing shown on page 102. It is my theory that while the electron
clouds are in the excited (expanded) state, they gather and convert
energy from the ZPR.
Apparently, as the hydrogen passes through the arc, the electric and
magnetic fields, plus heat, provide the activation energy triggering the
molecule's 'apprehension' of an additional 108,897 cal./gram molecule
of endothermic dissociation energy. Just exactly could this be possible?
Since each hydrogen atom is composed of a proton and an electron (each
with a pair of purportedly equal and opposite charges) one would expect
the binding force between the molecules to be very weak, but when the
atoms are separated they purportedly expand greatly in size—because
negative ions are larger than the non-metal atoms from which they are
formed—encompassing a greater volume of Omni Matter (my term for
the "ether"). On recombination, the atoms shrink in volume, as the
excess 'gathered' energy is squeezed out of the ether as free (heat)
energy. The "endothermic" dissociation absorbs only 103 cal/gram
molecule, yet on recombination, the atoms "exothermically" yield a net
108,897 cal/gram molecule. How exactly does this occur?
As stated in Space Aliens, it is my theory that all space is packed
solid with bumper-to-bumper "Omni Particles" (A.K.A., "the ether").
This elusive yet dense and ultra fine, absolutely transparent matter, is

97

meanwhile being omnidirectionally interpenetrated by something called
Zero Point Radiation ("ZPR"), of such high frequency and voltage, that

it is difficult to measure or comprehend. This radiation is in (non-
relativistic) equilibrium, therefore referred to as "Zero Point" radiation.

The facts proven by the atomic hydrogen process, explained by the
involvement of the Omni Matter and the ZPR, are forbidden by
relativity and quantum mechanics, in which a simple harmonic oscillator
cannot have a stationary state of zero kinetic energy, because the ground
state still has one half quantum of energy and the appropriate motion,
yet by relativity's 'other' rules, the principles of kinetic energy has no
applicability to electromagnetic radiation (the ZPR). Since relativity also
rejects the existence of an ether, there is nothing in so-called "empty
space" to contain such radiant energy, and the atomic hydrogen process
would have to create its energy from "nothing", therefore violating the
law of conservation of energy, as misinterpreted by the relativists, who
see all energy functions as part of the 'winding down' products of an
"original'' BIG BANG.
You can forget what the relativists said. The equilibrium of the ZPR
can be upset by disturbances created in the Omni Matter—which I
divide into Omnions (ultra-fine, positive "subprotonic" particles) and
Omnitrons ("sub-electronic" charges carried by the Omnions—all of
which the ZPR interpenetrates. Unidirectional vibrations (disturbances)
in the Omni Matter cause it to accumulate transferred force from the
ZPR, throwing Omni Matter out of equilibrium, and restoring
equilibrium to the ZPR. The Omni Matter's excess force is then
transferred through the atomic hydrogen atoms (or other temporarily
excited, enlarged atoms encompassing it) into the atomic mass
frequencies, during disturbance, thus restoring equilibrium to the Omni
Matter. This transferred force is not "energy created from nothing", but
only represents a change in the "form" of some of the infinite energy
(force overtime), already existing in 'space' in other forms (such as the
ZPR, or as "sub-electronic" charges).
Whenever H2 is dissociated to 2H (H1), and the single electron
clouds enlarge to encompass more Omni Matter (affected by a greater
ZPR), there is a reaction with and transfer of force from exothermic
atomic sources, through the molecules, into stripped Omnions which
were entrapped to bind the atoms together. This exothermic energy is
sufficient to throw the Omnions within the electron clouds, and
concentrated in the space between the atoms, beyond their electronic

98

quantum boundaries, so that the additional energy needed to dissociate
the atoms is regained from the surrounding Omni Matter and ZPR,
restoring the equilibrium of the Omni Matter. With the recombination
of the atomic hydrogen to form 2H, the converted ZPR radiant energy,
and sub-electronic charges—which I call Omnitrons—is ejected
(squeezed out) from the atoms, as heat or other interconverted radiant
energy- of lower frequency, as the electron clouds shrink with the
addition of positive charge carried by the Omnions. The reason the
electron cloud density of the hydrogen molecule is more concentrated in
the area around the space between the atoms, is because of the entrained
Omnions' presence there. Otherwise, the two negative charges carried
by the two atoms would cause mutual repulsion. Actually, since heat is
infrared-spectrum radiation, the process can be conceived as a means of
converting the ZPR from an ultra-penetrating positive ('cold') spectrum
radiation, to a mass-reactive infrared (heat) spectrum radiation, and
that is the proximate "source" of the so-called "free energy", in the form
of exothermic heat radiation. The ZPR is an analog to sunshine, except
it penetrates all matter all the time and is not affected by day or night,
so it can be converted to usable energy all the time with the appropriate
technology, such as the atomic hydrogen process.
Incidentally, this same atomic hydrogen process, as first published
here and now, is also the apparent source of the anomalous exothermic
heat produced in aqueous cavitation, as well as in the so-called "cold
fusion" process, which are two other free energy processes which are
based on the atomic hydrogen process. In addition, it is the phenomenon
which was apparently responsible for the cavitation-based, powerful
fuelless pumping action produced by the "Hydro Vacuo Motor" of John
Ernst Worrell Keely, in c. 1870..
The atomic hydrogen atoms have single, unpaired electrons in
enlarged shells. These atoms are in Mendeleev's Group I-a, and all the

atoms in that group have unpaired outer electrons, and are photo-
reactive to and transmute when exposed to ultraviolet light, as do all the

atoms of elements below atomic number 19. Some of these elements
transmute in visible and infrared light, and all of them can be used to
transmute ZPR into usable free energy. This photo-reactivity creates
temporary, artificial-radioactivity-producing isotopes of short half-life,
with the emission of photon energy restoring equilibrium to the atoms
as they return to their ground states. The energy for these radioactive
emissions comes from the ether, not from the atoms themselves. The

atoms can be analogized by certain crystals, described by the Raman
Effect, in which light passing through the crystals is "stepped down" to
lower frequencies. The infrared spectrum light produced by the atomic
hydrogen process is thermically reactive with normal atomic and
molecular matter, because of its longer wavelengths.
The transfer of force from the ZPR, via the Omni Matter, through
the dissociated H, atoms, is apparently the kind of thing somewhat
cryptically spoken of by Tesla, when he stated: "There is no energy in
matter other than that received from the environment."4
In so-called "cold fusion", the electrolytic cell produces "nascent
hydrogen", just like in the atomic hydrogen process, and the
recombination of the monoatomic hydrogen to 2H releases heat, the
product claimed. This atomic hydrogen process also proves Tesla's
theory that "atomic energy" comes from the environment, not from
'smashing' atoms. It proves that "mass" does not even enter into the
equation, and that Einstein's "E = MC2

" is wrong. Einstein's theory says
this process as I describe it could only be possible if the hydrogen were
'annihilated', converting its "mass" into heat, and otherwise, is
impossible. But the hydrogen is still hydrogen, before, during, and after
the process, and Einstein was wrong, wrong, wrong! It defies relativism,
Heisenberg's "uncertainty" principle, misinterpreted quantum
mechanics, and the BIG BANG!
Perhaps this or a similar process was also what Leland Anderson
referred to in his eulogy of Tesla, when he mentioned his "plucking"
thermal units "...right out of the thin air". After all, the hydrogen atoms
when in the 2H molecular form are smaller, therefore "compressed".
Compression of a gas releases heat radiation, usually thought to
originate with the energy endothermically absorbed during
decompression, but in the case of hydrogen, the change is effected by the
natural, physical process of recombination to 2H. The molecular atoms
can be 'decompressed' by a slight application of heat of dissociation,
because the strong binding force between the atoms created by the
Omnions, is more easily weakened by a small amount of exothermic
energy sufficient to separate the atoms, so that the Omnions regain their
Omnitronic charges from the surrounding ether and ZPR. Hydrogen
atoms have the highest charge-to-mass ratio known, a ratio which almost
completely neutralizes the protons. 'Decompression' of the electron
clouds occur during dissociation, because there is less positive mass
within the clouds to pull the clouds down toward the protons. As the

100

protons dissociate with application of the 103 cal/gram molecule, this
allows the greatly expanded electron clouds of the atoms to encompass
a larger volume or Omnions, carrying sub-electronic Omnitronic charges
equal to 108,897 cal/gram molecule, from the only source available, the
ZPR and Omni Matter (A.K.A., "ether"). Since there is no great cooling
activity in the proximate area of dissociation, the 'heat' can only come
from the Omni Matter and ZPR, and is ultimately a conversion of energy
in the form of random, 'cold' ZPR, and Omnitronic charges, into a
coherent, utilizable form of heat radiation. This process, though it can
be thermally triggered, is not merely a thermal process, because the net
energy released is not converted originally from thermal energy, but
from ZPR and Omnitrons, into infrared (thermal) radiation.
Amazingly, the raw data for this process came from ordinary
science books, though the oldest text was produced in England, and
would be practically unavailable to the average American experimenter.
The full magnitude and output comparable to petroleum was only
obviated by conversion of weights, measures, units and temperature
scales, into a consistent picture, to obtain the total net outputs. Most
physicist or chemists would refuse to believe the results, even if they had
calculated them themselves, and would insist that they had erred. This
is indeed an inverted BIG LIE, which is told very small, and often. The
BIG LIE consists of a denial that there is an ether, the distortion of
quantum mechanics, and the exaggeration and minimalization of other
incompatible measurements, to create a false overall picture. This is
then backed up by a vacuum of information, in publicly available texts
and other sources, created via the National Security Act, by the
Fuel/Power Cartels.

APPROPRIATE USE OF THE PROCESS

Now that we are beginning to understand our atomic-hydrogen,
free energy system, and the great magnitude of its output, what are its
most appropriate and immediately applicable uses?
The most direct, appropriate use of this technology appears to be
to provide heat for homes, as well as for home-industrial heating
purposes, such as in agriculture. A secondary use would be to produce
heat for steam to drive turbine-powered electric generators, or for
motive power for cars, trucks, boats, trains and planes. This system
would be excellent if coupled with a refrigerant-driven, closed-loop

101

turbo-electric generator, to provide electric power for electro-propulsive
flying saucers, the ultimate in private transportation.
Since the net output is heat, the first order of business is a special
heat exchanger, to transfer heat to water or other media, or to produce
steam for turbine power. The heat in the reaction chamber of the atomic
hydrogen furnace must be quickly removed by the exchanger to prevent
a buildup of heat sufficient to melt the reactor surfaces which receive
and catalyze the recombining gas atoms. The simplified design shown
below is merely a proposal.
Years ago, German metallurgists developed a hydrogen furnace
which used a copper crucible in a closed system which created the
"hydrogen environment" required for reduction of the platinum group
compounds. To withstand the high temperatures required for the
reductions, the copper crucible was cooled from below by water, which
removed the heat fast enough to prevent melting of the copper, as
platinum metals were melted in it with the torch from above. The
occlusion of oxygen prevented oxidation of the crucible and the platinum
metals, and insured reduction of the platinum compounds by the
hydrogen. This idea, together with over 45 years familiarity and use of
pyro-technology and over 34 years of welding, has influenced the design
of this (simplified version) atomic hydrogen furnace:

FREE ENERGY SURPRISE
Ether, ZPR & "Environmental" Energy

The following concerns a device which appears to unequivocally
disproves Einstein's relativity theories and proves Nikola Tesla's nuclear
theories.
Based on material in Space Aliens (pgs. vii, 185 and 187), a
researcher invited me to collaborate in a 50/50 development of a device
(similar to that shown on page vii), with the provision that I not use his
name. I suggested using an iron pipe and 15 kv transformer, based on
Tesla's use of an iron "antenna" in a Colorado Springs experiment. With
an approx. .1 amp/120 volt input (12 watts), an output of 48 kw was
achieved. Since the K-capture level of iron is 7,110 volts, I suggested
tuning the two 7,500-volt legs to 7,110 with a variac (total voltage
14,220), at which the output jumped to 66 kw, a gain of over 38%.
With 120 v/.l amps/60 cps/14.22 kv going into the ungrounded
device, the output (on the same leads) is apparently superimposed at
high frequency, so that, while maintaining the high voltage 'excitation
electric field', the output can be extracted by high voltage high
frequency filter and rectifier, thence reduced to usable electric power
with an inverter.
In "K-capture", the innermost "K-orbit" electron of iron drops into
the nucleus, converting a proton into an extra neutron. This appears to
render the iron unstable (i.e., "radioactive" in the Tesla sense), so that
it disturbs the equilibrium of and reacts with the ZPR, converting some
of it into an electrical output, via the iron. This device has also been said
to transmute zinc to mercury, when used in a different way to produce
great heat. At this point in time the device is somewhat of an enigma,
which appears to produce great energy.
As the device runs it hums, with no arcing, as a cool shaft of air
exits its top, with strong electric/magnetic fields about it. Some ozone
appears to be forming. This was probably (part of) what Tesla meant
when he said "I have a new use for iron", and "...it is when things are
quiet that something is really going on".
For a copy of Free Energy Surprise (© 1997, William R. Lyne,), a set
of plans and documentary photos send $10. (including postage) to:
Creatopia Productions, General Delivery, Lamy, New Mexico 87540;
Tel/Fax (505) 466-3022.

CONCLUSION

196,200 BTUs is a lot of energy from a pound of hydrogen. I have
to pinch myself. Then repeat it 10,000 times.
When this kind of "atomic energy" hit a small segment of the
unknowing American public—the welders—in the late '40s, there were
newspaper stories saying that the trans-Atlantic voyages of the Queen
Mary could be powered by a hunk of radioactive material the size of a
golf ball. They told their exaggerated stories that way when they wanted
us to get hooked and pay for it, but today's "nuclear reactors" produce
electricity at the same efficiency level as coal and gas-fired generators
(38%), and we still have to deal with the inevitable problems of greater
expense, entrenched, archaic, stagnant "nuclear" and fossil fuel
technology, nuclear decay, waste, and probable devastation ala Cernobyl.
The stumbling blocks to the use of hydrogen are actually illusions,
created by the corporate-state coercive monopolists—CommuNazis
(A.K.A., IllumiNazis). The atomic hydrogen process was discovered in
1912 by Langmuir, and was developed as a "welding process" in the
'30s. The DOE 'scientists' at Los Alamos said the use of hydrogen
involves heavy, cumbersome cryogenic tanks and equipment, until a
liquid hydride system developed by Dr. Gerald Schafflander of
California, was pointed out by me, in a letter to the New Mexican in
1980, totally ridiculing their phony efforts in 1979. Then Schafflander
and associates were prosecuted by the SEC, because the liquid hydride
stored hydrogen in something like "rock salt"—which cracked out at
about 70° C. DOE scientists mention only the heavier, more
cumbersome, solid metallic hydride systems. Schafflander's lighter liquid
hydride system, which uses solar-voltaics to generate the hydrogen,
would be a wonderful way to store and deliver hydrogen for the atomic

hydrogen process. Goodbye, oil cartels, hello atomic hydrogen, it's pay-
back time!

By the way, the reason my "cold fusion" process (using my weird.
lead-based cathode) which I tested back in 1980, worked so well (see
Space Aliens from the Pentagon 5

, pg. 198), was because Langmuir, back
in 1912, said a lead amalgam cathode produced "nascent (atomic)
hydrogen". Cold fusionists, throw away your palladium cathodes and get
lead amalgam! Watch the price of water rise to $1.40 per gallon. After
all, why should "they" allow "us" to buy a whole gallon of pure H2O
"chemicals" for less, especially when a gallon is enough for a lifetime?

105

References:
1. J. R. Partington (Emeritus Prof. Of Chem., Univ. Of London), A
Text-Book of Inorganic Chemistry, (Sixth Edition, 1953), Macmillan &
Co. Ltd., London
2. Van Nostrand's Scientific Encyclopedia, Fifth Edition (Edited by
Douglas M. Considine), Van Nostrand Reinhold Company (1976)
3. E. A. Moelwyn-Hughes, Physical Chemistry (Second Revised
Edition), Pergamon Press, London (1965)
4. Nikola Tesla, Lecture Before the Institute of Immigrant Welfare, May
12,1938
5. William R. Lyne, Space Aliens From the Pentagon, (First Edition,
1993; Second Edition, 1995), Creatopia Productions, General Delivery,
Lamy, New Mexico 87540

William Lyne was born in Big Spring, Texas in 1938 and
raised in west Texas oil boom towns, two years in the Bay Area of
northern California during WW II, and the southeast Texas Big
Thicket country. He has a B.S. in Fine Arts and Industrial Arts
(1965) from Sam Houston State University, Huntsville, Texas, and
an M.F.A. in Studio Arts (1969) from the University of Texas at
Austin. He has been living in New Mexico for the past 27 years,
and resides just to the south of Santa Fe, in the little railroad town
of Lamy, with his 13-year-old son Angus.
In 1993, he published Space Aliens From the Pentagon:
Flying Saucers are Man-Made Electrical Machines. In 1995, a
revised and expanded second edition of this book was issued. The
result has been the illegal dissemination of a vast quantity of false
government propaganda, via covert intelligence agents in the
"UFOlogy" community, to overcome the effects of the book.