1) The horizon always appears perfectly flat 360 degrees
around the observer regardless of altitude. All amateur
balloon, rocket, plane and drone footage show a completely
flat horizon over 20+ miles high. Only NASA and other
government “space agencies” show curvature in their fake
CGI photos/videos.

2) The horizon always rises to the eye level of the observer
as altitude is gained, so you never have to look down to see
it. If Earth were in fact a globe, no matter how large, as you
ascended the horizon would stay fixed and the observer /
camera would have to tilt looking down further and further
to see it.

3) The natural physics of water is to find and maintain its
level. If Earth were a giant sphere tilted, wobbling and
hurdling through infinite space then truly flat, consistently
level surfaces would not exist here. But since Earth is in fact
an extended flat plane, this fundamental physical property of
fluids finding and remaining level is consistent with
experience and common sense.

4) Rivers run down to sea-level finding the easiest course,
North, South, East, West and all other intermediary
directions over the Earth at the same time. If Earth were
truly a spinning ball then many of these rivers would be
impossibly flowing uphill, for example the Mississippi in its
3000 miles would have to ascend 11 miles before reaching
the Gulf of Mexico.
5) One portion of the Nile River flows for a thousand miles
with a fall of only one foot. Parts of the West African
Congo, according to the supposed inclination and movement
of the ball-Earth, would be sometimes running uphill and
sometimes down. This would also be the case for the
Parana, Paraguay and other long rivers.

6) If Earth were a ball 25,000 miles in circumference as
NASA and modern astronomy claim, spherical trigonometry
dictates the surface of all standing water must curve
downward an easily measurable 8 inches per mile multiplied
by the square of the distance. This means along a 6 mile
channel of standing water, the Earth would dip 6 feet on
either end from the central peak. Every time such
experiments have been conducted, however, standing water
has proven to be perfectly level.

7) Surveyors, engineers and architects are never required to
factor the supposed curvature of the Earth into their projects.
Canals, railways, bridges and tunnels for example are
always cut and laid horizontally, often over hundreds of
miles without any allowance for curvature.
8) The Suez Canal connecting the Mediterranean with the
Red Sea is 100 miles long without any locks making the
water an uninterrupted continuation of the two seas. When
constructed, the Earth’s supposed curvature was not taken
into account, it was dug along a horizontal datum line 26
feet below sea-level, passing through several lakes from one
sea to the other, with the datum line and water’s surface
running perfectly parallel over the 100 miles.

9) Engineer, W. Winckler was published in the Earth
Review regarding the Earth’s supposed curvature, stating,
“As an engineer of many years standing, I saw that this
absurd allowance is only permitted in school books. No
engineer would dream of allowing anything of the kind. I
have projected many miles of railways and many more of
canals and the allowance has not even been thought of,
much less allowed for. This allowance for curvature means
this - that it is 8” for the first mile of a canal, and increasing
at the ratio by the square of the distance in miles; thus a
small navigable canal for boats, say 30 miles long, will
have, by the above rule an allowance for curvature of 600
feet. Think of that and then please credit engineers as not
being quite such fools. Nothing of the sort is allowed. We
no more think of allowing 600 feet for a line of 30 miles of
railway or canal, than of wasting our time trying to square
the circle”

10) The London and Northwestern Railway forms a straight
line 180 miles long between London and Liverpool. The
railroad’s highest point, midway at Birmingham station, is
only 240 feet above sea-level. If the world were actually a
globe, however, curving 8 inches per mile squared, the 180
mile stretch of rail would form an arc with the center point
at Birmingham raising over a mile, a full 5,400 feet above
London and Liverpool.

11) A surveyor and engineer of thirty years published in the
Birmingham Weekly Mercury stated, “I am thoroughly
acquainted with the theory and practice of civil engineering.
However bigoted some of our professors may be in the
theory of surveying according to the prescribed rules, yet it
is well known amongst us that such theoretical
measurements are INCAPABLE OF ANY PRACTICAL
ILLUSTRATION. All our locomotives are designed to run
on what may be regarded as TRUE LEVELS or FLATS.
There are, of course, partial inclines or gradients here and
there, but they are always accurately defined and must be
carefully traversed. But anything approaching to eight
inches in the mile, increasing as the square of the distance,
COULD NOT BE WORKED BY ANY ENGINE THAT WAS
EVER YET CONSTRUCTED. Taking one station with
another all over England and Scotland, it may be stated that
all the platforms are ON THE SAME RELATIVE LEVEL.
The distance between Eastern and Western coasts of
England may be set down as 300 miles. If the prescribed
curvature was indeed as represented, the central stations at
Rugby or Warwick ought to be close upon three miles higher
than a chord drawn from the two extremities. If such was
the case there is not a driver or stoker within the Kingdom
that would be found to take charge of the train. We can only
laugh at those of your readers who seriously give us credit
for such venturesome exploits, as running trains round
spherical curves. Horizontal curves on levels are dangerous
enough, vertical curves would be a thousand times worse,
and with our rolling stock constructed as at present
physically impossible.”

12) The Manchester Ship Canal Company published in the
Earth Review stated, “It is customary in Railway and Canal
constructions for all levels to be referred to a datum which
is nominally horizontal and is so shown on all sections. It is
not the practice in laying out Public Works to make
allowances for the curvature of the earth
13) In a 19th century French experiment by M. M. Biot and
Arago a powerful lamp with good reflectors was placed on
the summit of Desierto las Palmas in Spain and able to be
seen all the way from Camprey on the Island of Iviza. Since
the elevation of the two points were identical and the
distance between covered nearly 100 miles, if Earth were a

ball 25,000 miles in circumference, the light should have
been more than 6600 feet, a mile and a quarter, below the
line of sight!

14) The Lieutenant-Colonel Portlock experiment used oxy-
hydrogen Drummond’s lights and heliostats to reflect the

sun’s rays across stations set up across 108 miles of St.
George’s Channel. If the Earth were actually a ball 25,000
miles in circumference, Portlock’s light should have
remained hidden under a mile and a half of curvature.

15) If the Earth were truly a sphere 25,000 miles in
circumference, airplane pilots would have to constantly
correct their altitudes downwards so as to not fly straight off
into “outer space;” a pilot wishing to simply maintain their
altitude at a typical cruising speed of 500 mph, would have
to constantly dip their nose downwards and descend 2,777
feet (over half a mile) every minute! Otherwise, without
compensation, in one hour’s time the pilot would find
themselves 31.5 miles higher than expected.

16) The experiment known as “Airy’s Failure” proved that
the stars move relative to a stationary Earth and not the other
way around. By first filling a telescope with water to slow
down the speed of light inside, then calculating the tilt
necessary to get the starlight directly down the tube, Airy
failed to prove the heliocentric theory since the starlight was
already coming in the correct angle with no change
necessary, and instead proved the geocentric model correct.

17) “Olber’s Paradox” states that if there were billions of
stars which are suns the night sky would be filled
completely with light. As Edgar Allen Poe said, “Were the
succession of stars endless, then the background of the sky
would present us a uniform luminosity, since there could
exist absolutely no point, in all that background, at which
would not exist a star.” In fact Olber’s “Paradox” is no
more a paradox than George Airy’s experiment was a
“failure.” Both are actually excellent refutations of the
heliocentric spinning ball model.

18) The Michelson-Morley and Sagnac experiments
attempted to measure the change in speed of light due to
Earth’s assumed motion through space. After measuring in
every possible different direction in various locations they
failed to detect any significant change whatsoever, again
proving the stationary geocentric model.

19) Tycho Brahe famously argued against the heliocentric
theory in his time, positing that if the Earth revolved around

the Sun, the change in relative position of the stars after 6
months orbital motion could not fail to be seen. He argued
that the stars should seem to separate as we approach and
come together as we recede. In actual fact, however, after
190,000,000 miles of supposed orbit around the Sun, not a
single inch of parallax can be detected in the stars, proving
we have not moved at all.

20) If Earth were truly constantly spinning Eastwards at
over 1000mph, vertically-fired cannonballs and other
projectiles should fall significantly due west. In actual fact,
however, whenever this has been tested, vertically-fired
cannonballs shoot upwards an average of 14 seconds
ascending, 14 seconds descending, and fall back to the
ground no more than 2 feet away from the cannon, often
directly back into the muzzle.

21) If the Earth were truly constantly spinning Eastwards at
over 1000mph, helicopters and hot-air balloons should be
able to simply hover over the surface of the Earth and wait
for their destinations to come to them!

22) If Earth were truly constantly spinning Eastwards at
over 1000mph, during the Red Bull stratosphere dive, Felix
Baumgartner, spending 3 hours ascending over New
Mexico, should have landed 2500 miles West into the
Pacific Ocean but instead landed a few dozen miles East of
the take-off point.
23) Ball-believers often claim “gravity” magically and
inexplicably drags the entire lower-atmosphere of the Earth
in perfect synchronization up to some undetermined height
where this progressively faster spinning atmosphere gives
way to the non-spinning, non-gravitized, non-atmosphere of
infinite vacuum space. Such non-sensical theories are
debunked, however, by rain, fireworks, birds, bugs, clouds,
smoke, planes and projectiles all of which would behave
very differently if both the ball-Earth and its atmosphere
were constantly spinning Eastwards at 1000mph.

24) If Earth and its atmosphere were constantly spinning
eastwards over 1000mph then North/South facing cannons
should establish a control while East-firing cannonballs

should fall significantly farther than all others while West-
firing cannonballs should fall significantly closer. In actual

fact, however, regardless of which direction cannons are
fired, the distance covered is always the same.
25) If Earth and its atmosphere were constantly spinning
eastwards over 1000mph, then the average commercial
airliner traveling 500mph should never be able to reach its
Eastward destinations before they come speeding up from
behind! Likewise Westward destinations should be arrived
at thrice the speed, but this is not the case.
26) Quoting “Heaven and Earth” by Gabrielle Henriet, “If
flying had been invented at the time of Copernicus, there is
no doubt that he would have soon realized that his
contention regarding the rotation of the earth was wrong, on
account of the relation existing between the speed of an
aircraft and that of the earth’s rotation. If the earth rotates,
as it is said, at 1,000 miles an hour, and a plane flies in the
same direction at only 500 miles, it is obvious that its place
of destination will be farther removed every minute. On the
other hand, if flying took place in the direction opposite to
that of the rotation, a distance of 1,500 miles would be
covered in one hour, instead of 500, since the speed of the
rotation is to be added to that of the plane. It could also be
pointed out that such a flying speed of 1,000 miles an hour,
which is supposed to be that of the earth’s rotation, has

recently been achieved, so that an aircraft flying at this rate
in the same direction as that of the rotation could not cover
any ground at all. It would remain suspended in mid-air
over the spot from which it took off, since both speeds are
equal.”
27) If Earth and its atmosphere were constantly spinning

Eastwards over 1000mph, landing airplanes on such fast-
moving runways which face all manner of directions North,

South, East, West and otherwise would be practically
impossible, yet in reality such fictional concerns are
completely negligible.

28) If the Earth and its atmosphere were constantly spinning
Eastwards over 1000mph, then clouds, wind and weather
patterns could not casually and unpredictably go every
which way, with clouds often travelling in opposing
directions at varying altitudes simultaneously.
29) If the Earth and its atmosphere were constantly spinning
Eastwards over 1000mph, this should somewhere somehow
be seen, heard, felt or measured by someone, yet no one in
history has ever experienced this alleged Eastward motion;
meanwhile, however, we can hear, feel and experimentally
measure even the slightest Westward breeze.

30) In his book “South Sea Voyages,” Arctic and Antarctic
explorer Sir James Clarke Ross, described his experience on
the night of November 27th, 1839 and his conclusion that
the Earth must be motionless: “The sky being very clear ...
it enabled us to observe the higher stratum of clouds to be
moving in an exactly opposite direction to that of the wind--
a circumstance which is frequently recorded in our
meteorological journal both in the north-east and south-east
trades, and has also often been observed by former

voyagers. Captain Basil Hall witnessed it from the summit of
the Peak of Teneriffe; and Count Strzelechi, on ascending
the volcanic mountain of Kiranea, in Owhyhee, reached at
4000 feet an elevation above that of the trade wind, and
experienced the influence of an opposite current of air of a
different hygrometric and thermometric condition ... Count
Strzelechi further informed me of the following seemingly
anomalous circumstance--that at the height of 6000 feet he
found the current of air blowing at right angles to both the
lower strata, also of a different hygrometric and
thermometric condition, but warmer than the inter-stratum.
Such a state of the atmosphere is compatible only with the
fact which other evidence has demonstrated, that the earth
is at rest."

31) Quoting “Zetetic Cosmogeny” Thomas Winships states:
“Let ‘imagination’ picture to the mind what force air would
have which was set in motion by a spherical body of 8,000
miles in diameter, which in one hour was spinning round
1,000 mph, rushing through space at 65,000 mph and
gyrating across the heavens? Then let ‘conjecture’
endeavor to discover whether the inhabitants on such a
globe could keep their hair on? If the earth-globe rotates on
its axis at the terrific rate of 1,000 miles an hour, such an
immense mass would of necessity cause a tremendous rush
of wind in the space it occupied. The wind would go all one
way, and anything like clouds which got ‘within the sphere
of influence’ of the rotating sphere, would have to go the
same way. The fact that the earth is at rest is proved by
kite flying.”
32) If “gravity” is credited with being a force strong enough
to hold the world’s oceans, buildings, people and
atmosphere stuck to the surface of a rapidly spinning ball,
then it is impossible for “gravity” to also simultaneously be

weak enough to allow little birds, bugs, and planes to take-
off and travel freely unabated in any direction.

33) If “gravity” is credited with being a force strong enough
to curve the massive expanse of oceans around a globular
Earth, it would be impossible for fish and other creatures to
swim through such forcefully held water.

34) Ship captains in navigating great distances at sea never
need to factor the supposed curvature of the Earth into their
calculations. Both Plane Sailing and Great Circle Sailing,
the most popular navigation methods, use plane, not
spherical trigonometry, making all mathematical

calculations on the assumption that the Earth is perfectly
flat. If the Earth were in fact a sphere, such an errant
assumption would lead to constant glaring inaccuracies.
Plane Sailing has worked perfectly fine in both theory and
practice for thousands of years, however, and plane
trigonometry has time and again proven more accurate than
spherical trigonometry in determining distances across the
oceans.

35) If the Earth were truly a globe, then every line of
latitude south of the equator would have to measure a
gradually smaller and smaller circumference the farther
South travelled. If, however, the Earth is an extended plane,
then every line of latitude south of the equator should
measure a gradually larger and larger circumference the
farther South travelled. The fact that many captains
navigating south of the equator assuming the globular theory
have found themselves drastically out of reckoning, moreso
the farther South travelled, testifies to the fact that the Earth
is not a ball.

36) During Captain James Clark Ross’s voyages around the
Antarctic circumference, he often wrote in his journal
perplexed at how they routinely found themselves out of
accordance with their charts, stating that they found
themselves an average of 12-16 miles outside their
reckoning every day, later on further south as much as 29
miles.

37) Lieutenant Charles Wilkes commanded a United States
Navy exploration expedition to the Antarctic from 1838 to
1842, and in his journals also mentioned being consistently
east of his reckoning, sometimes over 20 miles in less than
18 hours.
38) To quote Reverend Thomas Milner, “In the southern
hemisphere, navigators to India have often fancied
themselves east of the Cape when still west, and have been
driven ashore on the African coast, which, according to
their reckoning, lay behind them. This misfortune happened
to a fine frigate, the Challenger, in 1845. How came Her
Majesty’s Ship ‘Conqueror,’ to be lost? How have so many
other noble vessels, perfectly sound, perfectly manned,
perfectly navigated, been wrecked in calm weather, not only
in dark night, or in a fog, but in broad daylight and sunshine
- in the former case upon the coasts, in the latter, upon
sunken rocks - from being ‘out of reckoning?’” The simple
answer is that Earth is not a ball.

39) Practical distance measurements taken from “The
Australian Handbook, Almanack, Shippers’ and Importers’
Directory” state that the straight line distance between
Sydney and Nelson is 1550 statute miles. Their given
difference in longitude is 22 degrees 2’14”. Therefore if 22
degrees 2’14” out of 360 is 1550 miles, the entirety would

measure 25,182 miles. This is not only larger than the ball-
Earth is said to be at the equator, but a whole 4262 miles

greater than it would be at Sydney’s southern latitude on a
globe of said proportions.
40) From near Cape Horn, Chile to Port Philip in
Melbourne, Australia the distance is 10,500 miles, or 143
degrees of longitude away. Factoring in the remaining
degrees to 360 makes for a total distance of 26,430 miles

around this particular latitude, which is over 1500 miles
wider than Earth is supposed to be at the equator, and many
more thousands of miles wider than it is supposed to be at
such Southern latitudes.
41) Similar calculations made from the Cape of Good
Hope, South Africa to Melbourne, Australia at an average
latitude of 35.5 degrees South, have given an approximate
figure of over 25,000 miles, which is again equal to or
greater than the Earth’s supposed greatest circumference at
the equator. Calculations from Sydney, Australia to
Wellington, New Zealand at an average of 37.5 degrees
South have given an approximate circumference of 25,500
miles, greater still! According to the ball-Earth theory, the
circumference of the Earth at 37.5 degrees Southern latitude
should be only 19,757 statute miles, almost six thousand
miles less than such practical measurements.

42) In the ball-Earth model Antarctica is an ice continent
which covers the bottom of the ball from 78 degrees South
latitude to 90 and is therefore not more than 12,000 miles in
circumference. Many early explorers including Captian
Cook and James Clark Ross, however, in attempting
Antarctic circumnavigation took 3 to 4 years and clocked
50-60,000 miles around. The British ship Challenger also
made an indirect but complete circumnavigation of
Antarctica traversing 69,000 miles. This is entirely
inconsistent with the ball model.

43) If Earth was a ball there are several flights in the
Southern hemisphere which would have their quickest,
straightest path over the Antarctic continent such as

Santiago, Chile to Sydney, Australia. Instead of taking the
shortest, quickest route in a straight line over Antarctica, all
such flights detour all manner of directions away from
Antarctica instead claiming the temperatures too cold for
airplane travel! Considering the fact that there are plenty of
flights to/from/over Antarctica, and NASA claims to have
technology keeping them in conditions far colder (and far
hotter) than any experienced on Earth, such an excuse is
clearly just an excuse, and these flights aren’t made because
they are impossible.

44) If Earth was a ball, and Antarctica was too cold to fly
over, the only logical way to fly from Sydney to Santiago
would be a straight shot over the Pacific staying in the
Southern hemisphere the entire way. Re-fueling could be
done in New Zealand or other Southern hemisphere
destinations along the way if absolutely necessary. In actual
fact, however, Santiago-Sydney flights go into the Northern
hemisphere making stop-overs at LAX and other North
American airports before continuing back down to the
Southern hemisphere. Such ridiculously wayward detours
make no sense on the globe but make perfect sense and form
nearly straight lines when shown on a flat Earth map.

45) On a ball-Earth, Johannesburg, South Africa to Perth,
Australia should be a straight shot over the Indian Ocean
with convenient re-fueling possibilities on Mauritus or
Madagascar. In actual practice, however, most
Johannesburg to Perth flights curiously stop over either in
Dubai, Hong Kong or Malaysia all of which make no sense

on the ball, but are completely understandable when mapped
on a flat Earth.

46) On a ball-Earth Cape Town, South Africa to Buenos
Aries, Argentina should be a straight shot over the Atlantic
following the same line of latitude across, but instead every
flight goes to connecting locations in the Northern
hemisphere first, stopping over anywhere from London to
Turkey to Dubai. Once again these make absolutely no
sense on the globe but are completely understandable
options when mapped on a flat Earth.

47) On a ball-Earth Johannesburg, South Africa to Sao
Paolo, Brazil should be a quick straight shot along the 25th

Southern latitude, but instead nearly every flight makes a re-
fueling stop at the 50th degree North latitude in London

first! The only reason such a ridiculous stop-over works in
reality is because the Earth is flat.

48) On a ball-Earth Santiago, Chile to Johannesburg, South
Africa should be an easy flight all taking place below the
Tropic of Capricorn in the Southern hemisphere, yet every
listed flight makes a curious re-fueling stop in Senegal near
the Tropic of Cancer in the North hemisphere first! When
mapped on a flat Earth the reason why is clear to see,

however, Senegal is actually directly in a straight-line path
half-way between the two.

49) If Earth were a spinning ball heated by a Sun 93 million
miles away, it would be impossible to have simultaneously
sweltering summers in Africa while just a few thousand
miles away bone-chilling frozen Arctic/Antarctic winters
experiencing little to no heat from the Sun whatsoever. If
the heat from the Sun traveled 93,000,000 miles to the
Sahara desert, it is absurd to assert that another 4,000 miles
(0.00004%) further to Antarctica would completely negate
such sweltering heat resulting in such drastic differences.
50) If the Earth were truly a globe, the Arctic and Antarctic
polar regions and areas of comparable latitude North and
South of the equator should share similar conditions and
characteristics such as comparable temperatures, seasonal
changes, length of daylight, plant and animal life. In reality,
however, the Arctic/Antarctic regions and areas of
comparable latitude North/South of the equator differ
greatly in many ways entirely inconsistent with the ball
model and entirely consistent with the flat model.

51) Antarctica is by far the coldest place on Earth with an
average annual temperature of approximately -57 degrees
Fahrenheit, and a record low of -135.8! The average annual
temperature at the North Pole, however, is a comparatively
warm 4 degrees. Throughout the year, temperatures in the
Antarctic vary less than half the amount at comparable
Arctic latitudes. The Northern Arctic region enjoys
moderately warm summers and manageable winters,
whereas the Southern Antarctic region never even warms
enough to melt the perpetual snow and ice. On a tilting,
wobbling, ball-Earth spinning uniformly around the Sun,
Arctic and Antarctic temperatures and seasons should not
vary so greatly.

52) Iceland at 65 degrees North latitude is home to 870
species of native plants and abundant various animal life.
Compare this with the Isle of Georgia at just 54 degrees
South latitude where there are only 18 species of native
plants and animal life is almost non-existent. The same
latitude as Canada or England in the North where dense
forests of various tall trees abound, the infamous Captain
Cook wrote of Georgia that he was unable to find a single
shrub large enough to make a toothpick! Cook wrote, “Not
a tree was to be seen. The lands which lie to the south are
doomed by nature to perpetual frigidness - never to feel the
warmth of the sun’s rays; whose horrible and savage aspect
I have not words to describe. Even marine life is sparse in
certain tracts of vast extent, and the sea-bird is seldom
observed flying over such lonely wastes. The contrasts
between the limits of organic life in Arctic and Antarctic
zones is very remarkable and significant.”

53) At places of comparable latitude North and South, the
Sun behaves very differently than it would on a spinning
ball Earth but precisely how it should on a flat Earth. For
example, the longest summer days North of the equator are
much longer than those South of the equator, and the
shortest winter days North of the equator are much shorter
than the shortest South of the equator. This is inexplicable
on a uniformly spinning, wobbling ball Earth but fits exactly
on the flat model with the Sun traveling circles over and
around the Earth from Tropic to Tropic.
54) At places of comparable latitude North and South, dawn
and dusk happen very differently than they would on a
spinning ball, but precisely how they should on a flat Earth.
In the North dawn and dusk come slowly and last far longer
than in the South where they come and go very quickly.
Certain places in the North twilight can last for over an hour
while at comparable Southern latitudes within a few minutes
the sunlight completely disappears. This is inexplicable on a
uniformly spinning, wobbling ball Earth but is exactly what
is expected on a flat Earth with the Sun traveling faster,
wider circles over the South and slower, narrower circles
over the North.

55) If the Sun circles over and around the Earth every 24
hours, steadily travelling from Tropic to Tropic every 6
months, it follows that the Northern, central region would
annually receive far more heat and sunlight than the
Southern circumferential region. Since the Sun must sweep
over the larger Southern region in the same 24 hours it has
to pass over the smaller Northern region, its passage must
necessarily be proportionally faster as well. This perfectly
explains the differences in Arctic/Antarctic temperatures,
seasons, length of daylight, plant and animal life; this is why
the Antarctic morning dawn and evening twilight are very
abrupt compared with the North; and this explains why
many midsummer Arctic nights the Sun does not set at all!

56) The “Midnight Sun” is an Arctic phenomenon
occurring annually during the summer solstice where for
several days straight an observer significantly far enough
north can watch the Sun traveling circles over-head, rising
and falling in the sky throughout the day, but never fully
setting for upwards of 72+ hours! If the Earth were actually
a spinning globe revolving around the Sun, the only place
such a phenomenon as the Midnight Sun could be observed
would be at the poles. Any other vantage point from 89
degrees latitude downwards could never, regardless of any
tilt or inclination, see the Sun for 24 hours straight. To see
the Sun for an entire revolution on a spinning globe at a
point other than the poles, you would have to be looking
through miles and miles of land and sea for part of the
revolution!

57) The establishment claims the Midnight Sun IS
experienced in Antarctica but they conveniently do not have
any uncut videos showing this, nor do they allow
independent explorers to travel to Antarctica during the
winter solstice to verify or refute these claims. Conversely,
there are dozens of uncut videos publicly available showing
the Arctic Midnight Sun and it has been verified beyond any
shadow of a doubt.

58) The Royal Belgian Geographical Society in their
“Expedition Antarctique Belge,” recorded that during the
most severe part of the Antarctic winter, from 71 degrees
South latitude onwards, the sun sets on May 17th and is not
seen above the horizon again until July 21st! This is
completely at odds with the ball-Earth theory, but easily
explained by the flat-Earth model. The Midnight Sun is
seen from high altitudes in extreme Northern latitudes
during Arctic summer because the Sun, at its inner-most
cycle, is circling tightly enough around the polar center that
it remains visible above the horizon for someone at such a
vantage point. Likewise, in extreme Southern latitudes
during Arctic summer, the Sun completely disappears from
view for over 2 months because there at the Northern
Tropic, at the inner-most arc of its boomerang journey, the
Sun is circling the Northern center too tightly to be seen
from the Southern circumference.

59) Quoting Gabrielle Henriet, “The theory of the rotation
of the earth may once and for all be definitely disposed of as
impracticable by pointing out the following inadvertence. It
is said that the rotation takes twenty-four hours and that its
speed is uniform, in which case, necessarily, days and nights
should have an identical duration of twelve hours each all
the year round. The sun should invariably rise in the
morning and set in the evening at the same hours, with the
result that it would be the equinox every day from the 1st of
January to the 31st of December. One should stop and
reflect on this before saying that the earth has a movement
of rotation. How does the system of gravitation account for
the seasonal variations in the lengths of days and nights if
the earth rotates at a uniform speed in twenty-four hours!?”

60) Anyone can prove the sea-horizon perfectly straight and
the entire Earth perfectly flat using nothing more than a
level, tripods and a wooden plank. At any altitude above
sea-level, simply fix a 6-12 foot long, smooth, leveled board

edgewise upon tripods and observe the skyline from eye-
level behind it. The distant horizon will always align

perfectly parallel with the upper edge of the board.
Furthermore, if you move in a half-circle from one end of
the board to the other whilst observing the skyline over the
upper edge, you will be able to trace a clear, flat 10-20 miles
depending on your altitude. This would be impossible if the
Earth were a globe 25,000 miles in circumference; the
horizon would align over the center of the board but then
gradually, noticeably decline towards the extremities. Just
ten miles on each side would necessitate an easily visible
curvature of 66.6 feet from each end to the center.

61) If the Earth were actually a big ball 25,000 miles in
circumference, the horizon would be noticeably curved even
at sea-level, and everything on or approaching the horizon

would appear to tilt backwards slightly from your
perspective. Distant buildings along the horizon would all
look like leaning towers of Piza falling away from the
observer. A hot-air balloon taking off then drifting steadily
away from you, on a ball-Earth would slowly and constantly
appear to lean back more and more the farther away it flew,
the bottom of the basket coming gradually into view as the
top of the balloon disappears from sight. In reality,
however, buildings, balloons, trees, people, anything and
everything at right angles to the ground/horizon remains so
regardless the distance or height of the observer.

62) Samuel Rowbotham’s experiments at the Old Bedford
Level proved conclusively the canal’s water to be
completely flat over a 6 mile stretch. First he stood in the
canal with his telescope held 8 inches above the surface of
the water, then his friend in a boat with a 5 foot tall flag
sailed the 6 miles away. If Earth were a ball 25,000 miles in
circumference the 6 mile stretch of water should have
comprised an arc exactly 6 feet high in the middle, so the
entire boat and flag should have ultimately disappeared,
when in fact the entire boat and flag remained visible at the
same height for the entire journey.

63) In a second experiment Dr. Rowbotham affixed flags 5
feet high along the shoreline, one at every mile marker.
Then using his telescope mounted at 5 feet just behind the
first flag looked over the tops of all 6 flags which lined up in
a perfectly straight line. If the Earth were a ball 25,000
miles in circumference the flags should have progressively
dipped down after the first establishing line of sight, the
second would have descended 8 inches, 32 inches for the
third, 6 feet for the fourth, 10 feet 8 inches for the fifth, and
16 feet 8 inches for the sixth.

64) Quoting “Earth Not a Globe!” by Samuel Rowbotham,
“It is known that the horizon at sea, whatever distance it
may extend to the right and left of the observer on land,
always appears as a straight line. The following experiment
has been tried in various parts of the country. At Brighton,
on a rising ground near the race course, two poles were
fixed in the earth six yards apart, and directly opposite the
sea. Between these poles a line was tightly stretched
parallel to the horizon. From the center of the line the view
embraced not less than 20 miles on each side making a
distance of 40 miles. A vessel was observed sailing directly
westwards; the line cut the rigging a little above the
bulwarks, which it did for several hours or until the vessel
had sailed the whole distance of 40 miles. The ship coming
into view from the east would have to ascend an inclined
plane for 20 miles until it arrived at the center of the arc,
whence it would have to descend for the same distance. The
square of 20 miles multiplied by 8 inches gives 266 feet as
the amount the vessel would be below the line at the
beginning and at the end of the 40 miles.”
65) Also Quoting Dr. Rowbotham, “On the shore near
Waterloo, a few miles to the north of Liverpool, a good
telescope was fixed, at an elevation of 6 feet above the
water. It was directed to a large steamer, just leaving the
River Mersey, and sailing out to Dublin. Gradually the
mast-head of the receding vessel came nearer to the horizon,
until, at length, after more than four hours had elapsed, it
disappeared. The ordinary rate of sailing of the Dublin
steamers was fully eight miles an hour; so that the vessel

would be, at least, thirty-two miles distant when the mast-
head came to the horizon. The 6 feet of elevation of the

telescope would require three miles to be deducted for
convexity, which would leave twenty-nine miles, the square
of which, multiplied by 8 inches, gives 560 feet; deducting
80 feet for the height of the main-mast, and we find that,
according to the doctrine of rotundity, the mast-head of the
outward bound steamer should have been 480 feet below the
horizon. Many other experiments of this kind have been
made upon sea-going steamers, and always with results
entirely incompatible with the theory that the earth is a
globe.”
66) Dr. Rowbotham conducted several other experiments
using telescopes, spirit levels, sextants and “theodolites,”
special precision instruments used for measuring angles in

horizontal or vertical planes. By positioning them at equal
heights aimed at each other successively he proved over and
over the Earth to be perfectly flat for miles without a single
inch of curvature. His findings caused quite a stir in the
scientific community and thanks to 30 years of his efforts,
the shape of the Earth became a hot topic of debate around
the turn of the nineteenth century.

67) The distance across the Irish Sea from the Isle of Man’s
Douglas Harbor to Great Orm’s Head in North Wales is 60
miles. If the Earth was a globe then the surface of the water
between them would form a 60 mile arc, the center towering

1944 feet higher than the coastlines at either end. It is well-
known and easily verifiable, however, that on a clear day,

from a modest altitude of 100 feet, the Great Orm’s Head is
visible from Douglas Harbor. This would be completely
impossible on a globe of 25,000 miles. Assuming the 100
foot altitude causes the horizon to appear approximately 13
miles off, the 47 miles remaining means the Welsh coastline
should still fall an impossible 1472 feet below the line of
sight!

68) The Philadelphia skyline is clearly visible from Apple
Pie Hill in the New Jersey Pine Barrens 40 miles away. If
Earth were a ball 25,000 miles in circumference, factoring in
the 205 foot elevation of Apple Pie Hill, the Philly skyline
should remain well-hidden beyond 335 feet of curvature.

69) The New York City skyline is clearly visible from
Harriman State Park’s Bear Mountain 60 miles away. If
Earth were a ball 25,000 miles in circumference, viewing
from Bear Mountain’s 1,283 foot summit, the Pythagorean
Theorem determining distance to the horizon being 1.23
times the square root of the height in feet, the NYC skyline
should be invisible behind 170 feet of curved Earth.

70) From Washington’s Rock in New Jersey, at just a 400
foot elevation, it is possible on a clear day to see the
skylines of both New York and Philadelphia in opposite
directions at the same time covering a total distance of 120
miles! If Earth were a ball 25,000 miles in circumference,
both of these skylines should be hidden behind over 800 feet
of Earth’s curvature.

71) It is often possible to see the Chicago skyline from sea-
level 60 miles away across Lake Michigan. In 2015 after

photographer Joshua Nowicki photographed this
phenomenon several news channels quickly claimed his
picture to be a “superior mirage,” an atmospheric anomaly
caused by temperature inversion. While these certainly do
occur, the skyline in question was facing right-side up and

clearly seen unlike a hazy illusory mirage, and on a ball-
Earth 25,000 miles in circumference should be 2,400 feet

below the horizon.

72) October 16, 1854 the Times newspaper reported the
Queen’s visit to Great Grimsby from Hull recording they
were able to see the 300 foot tall dock tower from 70 miles
away. On a ball-Earth 25,000 miles in circumference,
factoring their 10 foot elevation above the water and the
tower’s 300 foot height, at 70 miles away the dock tower
should have remained an entire 2,600 feet below the
horizon.
73) In 1872 Capt. Gibson and crewmates, sailing the ship
“Thomas Wood” from China to London, reported seeing the
entirety of St. Helena Island on a clear day from 75 miles
away. Factoring in their height during measurement on a
ball-Earth 25,000 miles in circumference, it was found the
island should have been 3,650 feet below their line of sight.

74) From Genoa, Italy at a height of just 70 feet above sea-
level, the island of Gorgona can often be seen 81 miles

away. If Earth were a ball 25,000 miles in circumference,
Gorgona should be hidden beyond 3,332 feet of curvature.

75) From Genoa, Italy at a height of just 70 feet above sea-
level, the island of Corsica can often be seen 99 miles away.

If Earth were a ball 25,000 miles in circumference, Corsica
should fall 5,245 feet, almost an entire mile below the
horizon.

76) From Genoa, Italy 70 feet above sea-level, the island of
Capraia 102 miles away can often be seen as well. If Earth
were a ball 25,000 miles in circumference, Capraia should
always remain hidden behind 5,605 feet, over a mile of
supposed curvature.

77) Also from Genoa, on bright clear days, the island of
Elba can be seen an incredible 125 miles away! If Earth
were a ball 25,000 miles in circumference, Elba should be
forever invisible behind 8770 feet of curvature.

78) From Anchorage, Alaska at an elevation of 102 feet, on
clear days Mount Foraker can be seen with the naked eye
120 miles away. If Earth were a ball 25,000 miles in
circumference, Mount Foraker’s 17,400 summit should be
leaning back away from the observer covered by 7,719 feet
of curved Earth. In reality, however, the entire mountain
can be quite easily seen standing straight from base to
summit.

79) From Anchorage, Alaska at an elevation of 102 feet, on
clear days Mount McKinley can be seen with the naked eye
from 130 miles away. If Earth were a ball 25,000 miles in
circumference, Mount McKinley’s 20,320 foot summit
should be leaning back away from the observer and almost
half covered by 9,220 feet of curved Earth. In reality,
however, the entire mountain can be quite easily seen
standing straight from base to summit.

80) In Chambers’ Journal, February 1895, a sailor near
Mauritius in the Indian Ocean reported having seen a vessel
which turned out to be an incredible 200 miles away! The
incident caused much heated debate in nautical circles at the
time, gaining further confirmation in Aden, Yemen where
another witness reported seeing a missing Bombay steamer

from 200 miles away. He correctly stated the precise
appearance, location and direction of the steamer all later
corroborated and confirmed correct by those onboard. Such
sightings are absolutely inexplicable if the Earth were
actually a ball 25,000 miles around, as ships 200 miles
distant would have to fall approximately 5 miles below line
of sight!
81) The distance from which various lighthouse lights
around the world are visible at sea far exceeds what could be
found on a ball-Earth 25,000 miles in circumference. For
example, the Dunkerque Light in southern France at an

altitude of 194 feet is visible from a boat (10 feet above sea-
level) 28 miles away. Spherical trigonometry dictates that if

the Earth was a globe with the given curvature of 8 inches
per mile squared, this light should be hidden 190 feet below
the horizon.

82) The Port Nicholson Light in New Zealand is 420 feet
above sea-level and visible from 35 miles away where it
should be 220 feet below the horizon.

83) The Egerö Light in Norway is 154 feet above high-
water and visible from 28 statute miles where it should be

230 feet below the horizon.
84) The Light at Madras, on the Esplanade, is 132 feet high
and visible from 28 miles away, where it should be 250 feet
below the line of sight.
85) The Cordonan Light on the west coast of France is 207
feet high and visible from 31 miles away, where it should be
280 feet below the line of sight.
86) The light at Cape Bonavista, Newfoundland is 150 feet
above sea-level and visible at 35 miles, where it should be
491 feet below the horizon.
87) The lighthouse steeple of St. Botolph’s Parish Church
in Boston is 290 feet tall and visible from over 40 miles
away, where it should be hidden a full 800 feet below the
horizon!

88) The Isle of Wight lighthouse in England is 180 feet high
and can be seen up to 42 miles away, a distance at which
modern astronomers say the light should fall 996 feet below
line of sight.
89) The Cape L’Agulhas lighthouse in South Africa is 33
feet high, 238 feet above sea level, and can be seen for over
50 miles. If the world were a globe, this light would fall
1,400 feet below an observer’s line of sight.
90) The Statue of Liberty in New York stands 326 feet
above sea level and on a clear day can be seen as far as 60
miles away. If the Earth were a globe, that would put Lady
Liberty at an impossible 2,074 feet below the horizon.

91) The lighthouse at Port Said, Egypt, at an elevation of
only 60 feet has been seen an astonishing 58 miles away,
where, according to modern astronomy it should be 2,182
feet below the line of sight!
92) The Notre Dame Antwerp spire stands 403 feet high
from the foot of the tower with Strasburg measuring 468 feet
above sea level. With the aid of a telescope, ships can be
distinguished on the horizon and captains declare they can
see the cathedral spire from an amazing 150 miles away. If
the Earth were a globe, however, at that distance the spire
should be an entire mile, 5,280 feet below the horizon!

93) The St. George’s Channel between Holyhead and
Kingstown Harbor near Dublin is 60 miles across. When
half-way across a ferry passenger will notice behind them

the light on Holyhead pier as well as in front of them the
Poolbeg light in Dublin Bay. The Holyhead Pier light is 44
feet high, while the Poolbeg lighthouse 68 feet, therefore a
vessel in the middle of the channel, 30 miles from either side
standing on a deck 24 feet above the water, can clearly see
both lights. On a ball Earth 25,000 miles in circumference,
however, both lights should be hidden well below both
horizons by over 300 feet!

94) From the highland near Portsmouth Harbor in
Hampshire, England looking across Spithead to the Isle of
Wight, the entire base of the island, where water and land
come together composes a perfectly straight line 22 statute
miles long. According to the ball-Earth theory, the Isle of
Wight should decline 80 feet from the center on each side to
account for the necessary curvature. The cross-hairs of a
good theodolite directed there, however, have repeatedly
shown the land and water line to be perfectly level.

95) On a clear day from the highland near Douglas Harbor
on the Isle of Man, the whole length of the coast of North
Wales is often plainly visible to the naked eye. From the
Point of Ayr at the mouth of the River Dee to Holyhead
comprises a 50 mile stretch which has also been repeatedly
found to be perfectly horizontal. If the Earth actually had
curvature of 8 inches per mile squared, as NASA and
modern astronomy claim, the 50 mile length of Welsh coast
seen along the horizon in Liverpool Bay would have to
decline from the center-point an easily detectable 416 feet
on each side!
96) From “100 Proofs the Earth is Not a Globe” by William
Carpenter, “If we take a journey down the Chesapeake Bay,
by night, we shall see the ‘light’ exhibited at Sharpe's Island
for an hour before the steamer gets to it. We may take up a
position on the deck so that the rail of the vessel's side will
be in a line with the ‘light’ and in the line of sight; and we
shall find that in the whole journey the light won't vary in
the slightest degree in its apparent elevation. But, say that a

distance of thirteen miles has been traversed, the
astronomers' theory of ‘curvature’ demands a difference
(one way or the other!) in the apparent elevation of the light,
of 112 feet 8 inches! Since, however, there is not a
difference of 100 hair's breadths, we have a plain proof that
the water of the Chesapeake Bay is not curved, which is a
proof that the Earth is not a globe.”
97) NASA and modern astronomy say the Earth is a giant
ball tilted back, wobbling and spinning 1,000 mph around its
central axis, traveling 67,000 mph circles around the Sun,
spiraling 500,000 mph around the Milky Way, while the
entire galaxy rockets a ridiculous 670,000,000 mph through
the Universe, with all of these motions originating from an
alleged “Big Bang” cosmogenic explosion 14 billion years
ago. That’s a grand total of 670,568,000 mph in several
different directions we’re all supposedly speeding along at
simultaneously, yet no one has ever seen, felt, heard,
measured or proven a single one of these motions to exist
whatsoever.
98) NASA and modern astronomy say Polaris, the North
Pole star, is somewhere between 323-434 light years, or
about 2 quadrillion miles, away from us! Firstly, note that is
between 1,938,000,000,000,000 - 2,604,000,000,000,000
miles making a difference of 666,000,000,000,000 (over six
hundred trillion) miles! If modern astronomy cannot even
agree on the distance to stars within hundreds of trillions of
miles, perhaps their “science” is flawed and their theory
needs re-examining. However, even granting them their
obscurely distant stars, it is impossible for heliocentrists to
explain how Polaris manages to always remain perfectly
aligned straight above the North Pole throughout Earth’s
various alleged tilting, wobbling, rotating and revolving
motions.

99) Viewed from a ball-Earth, Polaris, situated directly over
the North Pole, should not be visible anywhere in the
Southern hemisphere. For Polaris to be seen from the
Southern hemisphere of a globular Earth, the observer
would have to be somehow looking “through the globe,” and
miles of land and sea would have to be transparent. Polaris
can be seen, however, up to over 20 degrees South latitude.
100) If Earth were a ball, the Southern Cross and other
Southern constellations would all be visible at the same time

from every longitude on the same latitude as is the case in
the North with Polaris and its surrounding constellations.
Ursa Major/Minor and many others can be seen from every
Northern meridian simultaneously whereas in the South,
constellations like the Southern Cross cannot. This proves

the Southern hemisphere is not “turned under” as in the ball-
Earth model, but simply stretching further outwards away

from the Northern center-point as in the flat Earth model.

101) Sigma Octantis is claimed to be a Southern central
pole star similar to Polaris, around which the Southern
hemisphere stars all rotate around the opposite direction.
Unlike Polaris, however, Sigma Octantis can NOT be seen
simultaneously from every point along the same latitude, it
is NOT central but allegedly 1 degree off-center, it is NOT
motionless, and in fact cannot be seen at all using publicly
available telescopes! There is legitimate speculation
regarding whether Sigma Octantis even exists. Either way,
the direction in which stars move overhead is based on
perspective and the exact direction you’re facing, not which
hemisphere you are in.

102) Some heliocentrists have tried to suggest that the Pole
Star’s gradual declination overhead as an observer travels
southwards is proof of a globular Earth. Far from it, the
declination of the Pole Star or any other object is simply a
result of the Law of Perspective on plane (flat) surfaces.
The Law of Perspective dictates that the angle and height at
which an object is seen diminishes the farther one recedes

from the object, until at a certain point the line of sight and
the seemingly uprising surface of the Earth converges to a
vanishing point (i.e. the horizon line) beyond which the
object is invisible. In the ball-Earth model the horizon is
claimed to be the curvature of the Earth, whereas in reality,
the horizon is known to be simply the vanishing line of
perspective based on the strength of your eyes, instruments,
weather and altitude.

103) There are several constellations which can be seen
from far greater distances over the face of the Earth than
should be possible if the world were a rotating, revolving,
wobbling ball. For instance, Ursa Major, very close to
Polaris, can be seen from 90 degrees North latitude (the
North Pole) all the way down to 30 degrees South latitude.
For this to be possible on a ball-Earth the Southern
observers would have to be seeing through hundreds or
thousands of miles of bulging Earth to the Northern sky.
104) The constellation Vulpecula can be seen from 90
degrees North latitude, all the way to 55 degrees South
latitude. Taurus, Pisces and Leo can be seen from 90
degrees North all the way to 65 degrees South. An observer
on a ball-Earth, regardless of any tilt or inclination, should
not logically be able to see this far.
105) Aquarius and Libra can be seen from 65 degrees North
to 90 degrees South! The constellation Virgo is visible from
80 degrees North down to 80 degrees South, and Orion can
be seen from 85 degrees North all the way to 75 degrees
South latitude! These are all only possible because the
“hemispheres” are not spheres at all but concentric circles of
latitude extending outwards from the central North Pole with
the stars rotating over and around.

106) The so-called “South Pole” is simply an arbitrary point
along the Antarctic ice marked with a red and white
barbershop pole topped with a metal ball-Earth. This
ceremonial South Pole is admittedly and provably NOT the
actual South Pole, however, because the actual South Pole
could be demonstrably confirmed with the aid of a compass
showing North to be 360 degrees around the observer.
Since this feat has never been achieved, the model remains
pure theory, along with the establishment’s excuse that the
geomagnetic poles supposedly constantly move around
making verification of their claims impossible.

107) Ring magnets of the kind found in loudspeakers have a
central North pole with the opposite “South” pole actually
being all points along the outer circumference. This
perfectly demonstrates the magnetism of our flat Earth,
whereas the alleged source of magnetism in the ball-Earth
model is emitted from a hypothetical molten magnetic core
in the center of the ball which they claim conveniently
causes both poles to constantly move thus evading
independent verification at their two “ceremonial poles.” In
reality the deepest drilling operation in history, the Russian
Kola Ultradeep, managed to get only 8 miles down, so the
entire ball-Earth model taught in schools showing a crust,
outer-mantle, inner-mantle, outer-core and inner-core layers
are all purely speculation as we have never penetrated
through beyond the crust.

108) The mariner’s compass is an impossible and non-
sensical instrument for use on a ball-Earth. It

simultaneously points North and South over a flat surface,
yet claims to be pin-pointing two constantly moving
geomagnetic poles at opposite ends of a spinning sphere
originating from a hypothetical molten metal core. If
compass needles were actually drawn to the North pole of a
globe, the opposing “South” needle would actually be
pointing up and off into outer-space.

109) There are no fixed “East” or “West” points just as
there is no fixed “South.” The North central Pole is the only
proven fixed point on our flat Earth, with South being all
straight lines outwards from the pole, East and West being
concentric circles at constant right angles 90 degrees from
the pole. A westerly circumnavigation of Earth is thus
going around with Polaris continually on your right, while
an easterly circumnavigation is going around with Polaris
always at your left.
110) Magellan and others’ East/West circumnavigations of
Earth are often quoted as proof of the ball model. In actual
fact, however, sailing or flying at rights angles to the North
pole and eventually returning to one’s original location is no
more difficult or mysterious than doing so on a globe. Just
as an architect’s compass can place its center-point on a flat
piece of paper and trace a circle either way around the
“pole,” so can a ship or plane circumnavigate a flat-Earth.

111) Since the North Pole and Antarctica are covered in ice
and guarded “no-fly” zones, no ships or planes have ever
been known to circumnavigate the Earth in North/South

directions. The only kind of circumnavigation which could
not happen on a flat-Earth is North/Southbound, which is
likely the very reason for the heavily-enforced flight
restrictions. The fact that there has yet to be a single
verified North/South circumnavigation of Earth serves as
standing proof the world is not a ball.

112) The Sun brings noon to every time-zone as it passes
directly over-head every 15 degree demarcation point, 24
times per day in its circular path over and around the Earth.
If time-zones were instead caused by the uniform spinning
of the ball-Earth around the Sun, every 6 months as Earth
found itself on the opposite side of the Sun, clocks all over
Earth would have to flip 12 hours, day would be night and
night would be day.
113) The idea that people are standing, ships are sailing and
planes are flying upside down on certain parts of Earth while
others tilted at 90 degrees and all other impossible angles is
complete absurdity. The idea that a man digging a hole
straight down could eventually reach sky on the other side is
ludicrous. Common sense tells every free-thinking person
correctly that there truly is an “up” and “down” in nature,
unlike the “everything is relative” rhetoric of the
Newtonian/Einsteinian paradigm.

114) Quoting, “On the False Wisdom of the Philosophers”
by Lacantius, “A sphere where people on the other side live
with their feet above their heads, where rain, snow and hail
fall upwards, where trees and crops grow upside-down and
the sky is lower than the ground? The ancient wonder of the
hanging gardens of Babylon dwindle into nothing in
comparison to the fields, seas, towns and mountains that
pagan philosophers believe to be hanging from the earth
without support!”

115) The existing laws of density and buoyancy perfectly
explained the physics of falling objects long before knighted
Freemason “Sir” Isaac Newton bestowed his theory of
“gravity” upon the world. It is a fact that objects placed in
denser mediums rise up while objects placed in less dense
mediums sink down. To fit with the heliocentric model
which has no up or down, Newton instead claimed objects
are attracted to large masses and fall towards the center. Not
a single experiment in history, however, has shown an
object massive enough to, by virtue of its mass alone, cause
other smaller masses to be attracted to it as Newton claims
“gravity” does with Earth, the Sun, Moon, Stars and Planets.

116) There has also never been a single experiment in
history showing an object massive enough to, by virtue of its
mass alone, cause another smaller mass to orbit around it.
The magic theory of gravity allows for oceans, buildings and
people to remain forever stuck to the underside of a spinning
ball while simultaneously causing objects like the Moon and
satellites to remain locked in perpetual circular orbits around
the Earth. If these were both true then people should be able
to jump up and start orbiting circles around the Earth, or the
Moon should have long ago been sucked into the Earth.
Neither of these theories have ever been experimentally
verified and their alleged results are mutually exclusive.

117) Newton also theorized and it is now commonly taught
that the Earth’s ocean tides are caused by gravitational lunar
attraction. If the Moon is only 2,160 miles in diameter and

the Earth 8,000 miles, however, using their own math and
“law,” it follows that the Earth is 87 times more massive and
therefore the larger object should attract the smaller to it,
and not the other way around. If the Earth’s greater gravity
is what keeps the Moon in orbit, it is impossible for the
Moon’s lesser gravity to supersede the Earth’s gravity,
especially at Earth’s sea-level, where its gravitational
attraction would even further out-trump the Moon’s. And if
the Moon’s gravity truly did supersede the Earth’s causing
the tides to be drawn towards it, there should be nothing to
stop them from continuing onwards and upwards towards
their great attractor.

118) Furthermore, the velocity and path of the Moon are
uniform and should therefore exert a uniform influence on
the Earth’s tides, when in actuality the Earth’s tides vary
greatly and do not follow the Moon. Earth’s lakes, ponds,
marshes and other inland bodies of water also inexplicably
remain forever outside the Moon’s gravitational grasp! If
“gravity” was truly drawing Earth’s oceans up to it, all
lakes, ponds and other bodies of standing water should
certainly have tides as well.
119) It is claimed that the other planets are spheres and so
therefore Earth must also be a sphere. Firstly, Earth is a
“plane” not a “planet,” so the shape of these “planets” in the
sky have no bearing on the shape of the Earth beneath our
feet. Secondly, these “planets” have been known for
thousands of years around the world as the “wandering
stars” since they differ from the other fixed stars in their
relative motions only. When looked at with an unprejudiced
naked-eye or through a telescope, the fixed and wandering
stars appear as luminous discs of light, NOT spherical terra
firma. The pictures and videos shown by NASA of

spherical terra firma planets are all clearly fake computer-
generated images, and NOT photographs.

120) The etymology of the word “planet” actually comes
from late Old English planete, from Old French planete
(Modern French planète), from Latin planeta, from

Greek planetes, from (asteres) planetai “wandering (stars),”
from planasthai “to wander,” of unknown origin, possibly
from PIE *pele “flat, to spread” or notion of “spread out.”
And Plane (n) “flat surface,” c. 1600, from Latin
planum “flat surface, plane, level, plain,” planus “flat, level,
even, plain, clear.” They just added a “t” to our Earth plane
and everyone bought it.
121) When you observe the Sun and Moon you see two
equally-sized equidistant circles tracing similar paths at
similar speeds around a flat, stationary Earth. The “experts”
at NASA, however, claim your common sense every day
experience is false on all counts! To begin with, they say
the Earth is not flat but a big ball; not stationary but spinning
around 19 miles per second; they say the Sun does not
revolve around the Earth as it appears, but Earth revolves
around the Sun; the Moon, on the other hand, does revolve
around the Earth, though not East to West as it appears,
rather West to East; and the Sun is actually 400 times larger
than the Moon and 400 times farther away! You can clearly
see they are the same size and distance, you can see the
Earth is flat, you can feel the Earth is stationary, but
according to the gospel of modern astronomy, you are
wrong and a simpleton worthy of endless ridicule if you dare
to trust your own eyes and experience.

122) Quoting Allen Daves, “If the Government or NASA
had said to you that the Earth is stationary, imagine that.
And then imagine we are trying to convince people that 'no,
no it's not stationary, it's moving forward at 32 times rifle
bullet speed and spinning at 1,000 miles per hour.' We
would be laughed at! We would have so many people telling
us 'you are crazy, the Earth is not moving!' We would be
ridiculed for having no scientific backing for this convoluted
moving Earth theory. And not only that but then people
would say, 'oh then how do you explain a fixed, calm
atmosphere and the Sun's observable movement, how do you
explain that?' Imagine saying to people, 'no, no, the
atmosphere is moving also but is somehow magically
velcroed to the moving-Earth. The reason is not simply
because the Earth is stationary.' So what we are actually

doing is what makes sense. We are saying that the moving-
Earth theory is nonsense. The stationary-Earth theory makes

sense and we are being ridiculed. You've got to picture it
being the other way around to realize just how
RIDICULOUS this situation is. This theory from the

Government and NASA that the Earth is rotating and
orbiting and leaning over and wobbling is absolute
nonsense and yet people are clinging to it, tightly, like a
teddy bear. They just can't bring themselves to face the
possibility that the Earth is stationary though ALL the
evidence shows it: we feel no movement, the atmosphere

hasn't been blown away, we see the Sun move from East-to-
West, everything can be explained by a motionless Earth

without bringing in all these assumptions to cover up
previous assumptions gone bad.”
123) Heliocentrists’ astronomical figures always sound
perfectly precise, but they have historically been notorious
for regularly and drastically changing them to suit their
various models. For instance, in his time Copernicus
calculated the Sun’s distance from Earth to be 3,391,200
miles. The next century Johannes Kepler decided it was
actually 12,376,800 miles away. Issac Newton once said,
“It matters not whether we reckon it 28 or 54 million miles
distant for either would do just as well!” How scientific!?
Benjamin Martin calculated between 81 and 82 million
miles, Thomas Dilworth claimed 93,726,900 miles, John
Hind stated positively 95,298,260 miles, Benjamin Gould
said more than 96 million miles, and Christian Mayer
thought it was more than 104 million! Flat-Earthers
throughout the ages, conversely, have used sextants and
plane trigonometry to make such calculations and found the
Sun and Moon both to be only about 32 miles in diameter
and less than a few thousand miles from Earth.

124) Amateur balloon footage taken above the clouds has
provided stunning visual proof that the Sun cannot be
millions of miles away. In several shots you can see a clear
hot-spot reflecting on the clouds directly below the Sun’s
spotlight-like influence. If the Sun were actually millions of
miles away such a small, localized hot-spot could not occur.

125) Another proof the Sun is not millions of miles away is
found by tracing the angle of sun-rays back to their source
above the clouds. There are thousands of pictures showing
how sunlight comes down through cloud-cover at a variance
of converging angles. The area of convergence is of course
the Sun, and is clearly NOT millions of miles away, but
rather relatively close to Earth just above the clouds.

126) The Sun’s annual journey from tropic to tropic,
solstice to solstice, is what determines the length and
character of days, nights and seasons. This is why
equatorial regions experience almost year-round summer
and heat while higher latitudes North and especially South
experience more distinct seasons with harsh winters. The

heliocentric model claims seasons change based on the ball-
Earth’s alleged “axial tilt” and “elliptical orbit” around the

Sun, yet their flawed current model places us closest to the
Sun (91,400,000 miles) in January when its actually winter,
and farthest from the Sun (94,500,000 miles) in July when
its actually summer throughout most of the Earth.

127) The fact that the Sun and Moon’s reflections on water
always form a straight line path from the horizon to the
observer proves the Earth is not a ball. If Earth’s surface
was curved it would be impossible for the reflected light to
curve over the ball from horizon to observer.

128) There are huge centuries-old stone sundials and
moondials all over the world which still tell the time now
down to the minute as perfectly as the day they were made.
If the Earth, Sun and Moon were truly subject to the number
of contradictory revolving, rotating, wobbling and spiraling
motions claimed by modern astronomy, it would be
impossible for these monuments to so accurately tell time
without constant adjustment.

129) To quote William Carpenter, “Why, in the name of
common sense, should observers have to fix their telescopes

on solid stone bases so that they should not move a hair's-
breadth, - if the Earth on which they fix them moves at the

rate of nineteen miles in a second? Indeed, to believe that
‘six thousand million million million tons’ is ‘rolling,
surging, flying, darting on through space for ever’ with a
velocity compared with which a shot from a cannon is a
‘very slow coach,’ with such unerring accuracy that a
telescope fixed on granite pillars in an observatory will not
enable a lynx-eyed astronomer to detect a variation in its
onward motion of the thousandth part of a hair's-breadth is
to conceive a miracle compared with which all the miracles
on record put together would sink into utter insignificance.
Since we can, (in middle north latitudes), see the North Star,
on looking out of a window that faces it - and out of the very
same corner of the very same pane of glass in the very same
window - all the year round, it is proof enough for any man
in his senses that we have made no motion at all and that the
Earth is not a globe.”

130) From “Earth Not a Globe!” by Samuel Rowbotham,
“Take two carefully-bored metallic tubes, not less than six
feet in length, and place them one yard asunder, on the
opposite sides of a wooden frame, or a solid block of wood
or stone: so adjust them that their centres or axes of vision
shall be perfectly parallel to each other. Now, direct them to
the plane of some notable fixed star, a few seconds previous
to its meridian time. Let an observer be stationed at each
tube and the moment the star appears in the first tube let a
loud knock or other signal be given, to be repeated by the
observer at the second tube when he first sees the same star.
A distinct period of time will elapse between the signals
given. The signals will follow each other in very rapid
succession, but still, the time between is sufficient to show
that the same star is not visible at the same moment by two
parallel lines of sight when only one yard asunder. A slight
inclination of the second tube towards the first tube would
be required for the star to be seen through both tubes at the
same instant. Let the tubes remain in their position for six
months; at the end of which time the same observation or
experiment will produce the same results--the star will be
visible at the same meridian time, without the slightest
alteration being required in the direction of the tubes: from
which it is concluded that if the earth had moved one single
yard in an orbit through space, there would at least be
observed the slight inclination of the tube which the
difference in position of one yard had previously required.
But as no such difference in the direction of the tube is
required, the conclusion is unavoidable, that in six months
a given meridian upon the earth's surface does not move a
single yard, and therefore, that the earth has not the
slightest degree of orbital motion."
131) NASA and modern astronomy maintain that the Moon
is a solid, spherical, Earth-like habitation which man has
actually flown to and set foot on. They claim the Moon is a
non-luminescent planetoid which receives and reflects all its
light from the Sun. The reality is, however, that the Moon is
observably not a solid body, it is clearly circular, but not
spherical, and not in any way an Earth-like planetoid which
humans could set foot on. In fact, the Moon has been
proven largely transparent and completely self-luminescent,
shining with its own unique light.

132) The Sun’s light is golden, warm, drying, preservative
and antiseptic, while the Moon’s light is silver, cool, damp,
putrefying and septic. The Sun’s rays decrease the
combustion of a bonfire, while the Moon’s rays increase
combustion. Plant and animal substances exposed to
sunlight quickly dry, shrink, coagulate, and lose the
tendency to decompose and putrify; grapes and other fruits
become solid, partially candied and preserved like raisins,
dates, and prunes; animal flesh coagulates, loses its volatile
gaseous constituents, becomes firm, dry, and slow to decay.
When exposed to moonlight, however, plant and animal
substances tend to show symptoms of putrefaction and
decay. This proves that Sun and Moon light are different,
unique, and opposites as they are in the geocentric flat
model.

133) In direct sunlight a thermometer will read higher than
another thermometer placed in the shade, but in full, direct
moonlight a thermometer will read lower than another
placed in the shade. If the Sun’s light is collected in a large
lens and thrown to a focus point it can create significant
heat, while the Moon’s light collected similarly creates no
heat. In the "Lancet Medical Journal,” from March 14th,
1856, particulars are given of several experiments which
proved the Moon's rays when concentrated can actually
reduce the temperature upon a thermometer more than eight
degrees. So sunlight and moonlight clearly have altogether
different properties.
134) Furthermore the Moon itself cannot physically be both
a spherical body and a reflector of the Sun’s light.
Reflectors must be flat or concave for light rays to have any
angle of incidence; If a reflector’s surface is convex then
every ray of light points in a direct line with the radius
perpendicular to the surface resulting in no reflection.
135) Not only is the Moon clearly self-luminescent, shining
its own unique light, but it is also largely transparent. When
the waxing or waning Moon is visible during the day it is
possible to see the blue sky right through the Moon. And on
a clear night, during a waxing or waning cycle, it is even
possible to occasionally see stars and “planets” directly
through the surface of the Moon! The Royal Astronomical
Society has on record many such occurrences throughout
history which all defy the heliocentric model.

136) Many people think that modern astronomy’s ability to
accurately predict lunar and solar eclipses is a result and
proof positive of the heliocentric theory of the universe.
The fact of the matter however is that eclipses have been
accurately predicted by cultures worldwide for thousands of
years before the “heliocentric ball-Earth” was even a
glimmer in Copernicus’ imagination. Ptolemy in the 1st
century A.D. accurately predicted eclipses for six hundred
years on the basis of a flat, stationary Earth with equal
precision as anyone living today. All the way back in 600
B.C. Thales accurately predicted an eclipse which ended the
war between the Medes and Lydians. Eclipses happen
regularly with precision in 18 year cycles, so regardless of
geocentric or heliocentric, flat or globe Earth cosmologies,
eclipses can be accurately calculated independent of such
factors.

137) Another assumption and supposed proof of Earth’s
shape, heliocentrists claim that lunar eclipses are caused by
the shadow of the ball-Earth occulting the Moon. They
claim the Sun, Earth, and Moon spheres perfectly align like
three billiard balls in a row so that the Sun’s light casts the
Earth’s shadow onto the Moon. Unfortunately for
heliocentrists, this explanation is rendered completely
invalid due to the fact that lunar eclipses have happened and
continue to happen regularly when both the Sun and Moon
are still visible together above the horizon! For the Sun’s
light to be casting Earth’s shadow onto the Moon, the three
bodies must be aligned in a straight 180 degree syzygy, but
as early as the time of Pliny, there are records of lunar

eclipses happening while both the Sun and Moon are visible
in the sky. Therefore the eclipsor of the Moon cannot be the
Earth/Earth’s shadow and some other explanation must be
sought.

138) Another favorite “proof” of ball-Earthers is the
appearance from an observer on shore of ships’ hulls being
obfuscated by the water and disappearing from view when
sailing away towards the horizon. Their claim is that ships’
hulls disappear before their mast-heads because the ship is
beginning its declination around the convex curvature of the
ball-Earth. Once again, however, their hasty conclusion is

drawn from a faulty premise, namely that only on a ball-
Earth could this phenomenon occur. The fact of the matter

is that the Law of Perspective on plane surfaces dictates and
necessitates the exact same occurrence. For example a girl
wearing a dress walking away towards the horizon will
appear to sink into the Earth the farther away she walks.
Her feet will disappear from view first and the distance
between the ground and the bottom of her dress will
gradually diminish until after about half a mile it seems like
her dress is touching the ground as she walks on invisible
legs. Such is the case on plane surfaces, the lowest parts of
objects receding from a given point of observation
necessarily disappear before the highest.

139) Not only is the disappearance of ship’s hulls explained
by the Law of Perspective on flat surfaces, it is proven
undeniably true with the aid of a good telescope. If you
watch a ship sailing away into the horizon with the naked
eye until its hull has completely disappeared from view
under the supposed “curvature of the Earth,” then look
through a telescope, you will notice the entire ship quickly
zooms back into view, hull and all, proving that the
disappearance was caused by the Law of Perspective, not by
a wall of curved water! This also proves that the horizon is
simply the vanishing line of perspective from your point of
view, NOT the alleged “curvature” of Earth.
140) Foucault’s Pendulums are often quoted as proof of a
rotating Earth but upon closer investigation prove the
opposite. To begin with, Foucault’s pendulums do not
uniformly swing in any one direction. Sometimes they

rotate clockwise and sometimes counter-clockwise,
sometimes they fail to rotate and sometimes they rotate far
too much. The behavior of the pendulum actually depends

on 1) the initial force beginning its swing and, 2) the ball-
and-socket joint used which most-readily facilitates circular

motion over any other. The supposed rotation of the Earth is
completely inconsequential and irrelevant to the pendulum’s
swing. If the alleged constant rotation of the Earth affected
pendulums in any way, then there should be no need to
manually start pendulums in motion. If the Earth’s diurnal
rotation caused the 360 degree uniform diurnal rotation of
pendulums, then there should not exist a stationary
pendulum anywhere on Earth!

141) The “Coriolis Effect” is often said to cause sinks and
toilet bowls in the Northern Hemisphere to drain spinning in
one direction while in the Southern Hemisphere causing
them to spin the opposite way, thus providing proof of the
spinning ball-Earth. Once again, however, just like
Foucault’s Pendulums spinning either which way, sinks and
toilets in the Northern and Southern hemispheres do not
consistently spin in any one direction! Sinks and toilets in
the very same household are often found to spin opposite
directions, depending entirely upon the shape of the basin
and the angle of the water’s entry, not the supposed rotation
of the Earth.

142) People claim that if the Earth were flat, they should be
able to use a telescope and see clear across the oceans! This
is absurd, however, as the air is full of precipitation
especially over the oceans, and especially at the lowest,
densest layer of atmosphere is NOT transparent. Picture the
blurry haze over roads on hot, humid days. Even the best
telescope will blur out long before you could see across an
ocean. You can, however, use a telescope to zoom in

MUCH more of our flat Earth than would be possible on a
ball 25,000 miles in circumference.
143) People claim that if the Earth were flat, with the Sun
circling over and around us, we should be able to see the
Sun from everywhere all over the Earth, and there should be
daylight even at night-time. Since the Sun is NOT 93
million miles away but rather just a few thousand and
shining down like a spotlight, once it has moved
significantly far enough away from your location it becomes
invisible beyond the horizon and daylight slowly fades until
it completely disappears. If the Sun were 93 million miles
away and the Earth a spinning ball, the transition from
daylight to night would instead be almost instantaneous as
you passed the terminator line.

144) Pictures of the Moon appearing upside-down in the
Southern hemisphere and right-side up in the North are often
cited as proof of the ball-Earth, but once again, upon closer
inspection, provide another proof of the flat model. In fact,
time-lapse photography shows the Moon itself turns
clockwise like a wheel as it circles over and around the
Earth. You can find pictures of the Moon at 360 degrees of
various inclination from all over the Earth simply depending
on where and when the picture was taken.

145) Heliocentrists believe the Moon is a ball, even though
its appearance is clearly that of a flat luminous disc. We
only ever see the same one face (albeit at various
inclinations) of the Moon, yet it is claimed that there is
another “dark side of the Moon” which remains hidden.
NASA states the Moon spins opposite the spin of the Earth

in such a perfectly synchronized way that the motions cancel
each other out so we will conveniently never be able to
observe the supposed dark-side of the Moon outside of their
terrible fake CGI images. The fact of the matter is,
however, if the Moon were a sphere, observers in Antarctica
would see a different face from those at the equator, yet they
do not – just the same flat face rotated at various degrees.

146) The ball-Earth model claims the Moon orbits around
the Earth once every 28 days, yet it is plain for anyone to see
that the Moon orbits around the Earth every single day! The
Moon’s orbit is slightly slower than the Sun’s, but follows
the Sun’s same path from Tropic to Tropic, solstice to
solstice, making a full circle over the Earth in just under 25
hours.
147) The ball-Earth model claims the Sun is precisely 400
times larger than the Moon and 400 times further away from
Earth making them “falsely” appear exactly the same size.
Once again, the ball model asks us to accept as coincidence
something that cannot be explained other than by natural
design. The Sun and the Moon occupy the same amount of
space in the sky and have been measured with sextants to be
of equal size and equal distance, so claiming otherwise is
against our eyes, experience, experiments and common
sense.

148) Quoting “Earth Not a Globe!” by Samuel Rowbotham,
“It is found by observation that the stars come to the
meridian about four minutes earlier every twenty-four hours
than the sun, taking the solar time as the standard. This
makes 120 minutes every thirty days, and twenty-four hours
in the year. Hence all the constellations have passed before
or in advance of the sun in that time. This is the simple fact
as observed in nature, but the theory of rotundity and

motion on axes and in an orbit has no place for it. Visible
truth must be ignored, because this theory stands in the way,
and prevents its votaries from understanding it.”
149) Throughout thousands of years the same constellations
have remained fixed in their same patterns without moving
out of position whatsoever. If the Earth were a big ball
spinning around a bigger Sun spinning around a bigger
galaxy shooting off from the Biggest Bang as NASA claims,
it is impossible that the constellations would remain so
fixed. Based on their model, we should, in fact, have an
entirely different night sky every single night and never
repeat exactly the same star pattern twice.

150) If Earth were a spinning ball it would be impossible to
photograph star-trail time-lapses turning perfect circles
around Polaris anywhere but the North Pole. At all other
vantage points the stars would be seen to travel more or less
horizontally across the observer’s horizon due to the alleged
1000mph motion beneath their feet. In reality, however,
Polaris’s surrounding stars can always be photographed
turning perfect circles around the central star all the way
down to the Tropic of Capricorn.

151) If Earth were a spinning ball revolving around the Sun
it would actually be impossible for star-trail photos to show
perfect circles even at the North Pole! Since the Earth is
also allegedly moving 67,000mph around the Sun, the Sun
moving 500,000mph around the Milky Way, and the entire

galaxy going 670,000,000mph, these four contradictory
motions would make star-trail time-lapses all show irregular
curved lines.
152) In 2003, three University Geography professors
collaborated in an experiment to prove that the state of
Kansas is indeed actually flatter than a pancake! Using
topigraphical geodetic surveys covering over 80,000 square
miles it was determined that Kansas has a flatness ratio of
0.9997 over the entire state while the average pancake,
precisely measured using a confocal laser microscope comes
in at 0.957, making Kansas thereby literally flatter than a
pancake.

153) Quoting Reverend Thomas Milner’s “Atlas of Physical
Geography,” we find that, “Vast areas exhibit a perfectly
dead level, scarcely a rise existing through 1,500 miles from
the Carpathians to the Urals. South of the Baltic the
country is so flat that a prevailing north wind will drive the
waters of the Stattiner Haf into the mouth of the Oder, and
give the river a backward flow 30 or 40 miles. The plains of
Venezuela and New Granada, in South America chiefly on
the left of the Orinoco, are termed Ilanos, or level fields.
Often in the space of 270 square miles the surface does not
vary a single foot. The Amazon only falls 12 feet in the last
700 miles of its course; the La Plata has only a descent of
one thirty-third of an inch a mile.”
154) The Felix Baumgartner Red Bull dive outside camera
shows the same amount of “curvature of Earth” from
surface-level to jump-height proving it to be a deceiving
fish-eyed wide-angle lens, while the inside regular camera
shows a perfectly flat horizon, eye level at 128,000 feet,
which is only consistent with a flat plane.

155) Some people claim to have seen the curvature of the
Earth out their airplane windows. The glass used in all
commercial airplanes, however, is curved to remain flush

with the fuselage. This creates a slight effect mixed with
confirmation bias people mistake for being the alleged
curvature of the Earth. In actuality, the fact that you can see
the horizon at eye-level at 35,000 feet out both
port/starboard windows proves the Earth is flat. If the Earth
were a ball, no matter how big, the horizon would stay
exactly where it was and you would have to look DOWN
further and further to see the horizon at all. Looking straight
out the window at 35,000 feet you should see nothing but
"outer-space" from the port and starboard windows, as the
Earth/horizon are supposed to be BELOW you. If they are
visible at eye level outside both side windows, it’s because
the Earth is flat!

156) People also claim to see curvature in Go Pro or other
high altitude camera footage of the horizon. While it is true
that the horizon often appears convex in such footage, it just
as often appears concave or flat depending on the
tilt/movement of the camera. The effect is simply a
distortion due to wide-angle lenses. In lens-corrected and
footage taken without wide-angle technology, all amateur
high-altitude horizon shots appear perfectly flat.

157) If “gravity” magically dragged the atmosphere along
with the spinning ball Earth, that would mean the
atmosphere near the equator would be spinning around at

over 1000mph, the atmosphere over the mid-latitudes would
be spinning around 500mph, and gradually slower down to
the poles where the atmosphere would be unaffected at
0mph. In reality, however, the atmosphere at every point on
Earth is equally unaffected by this alleged force, as it has
never been measured or calculated and proven non-existent
by the ability of airplanes to fly unabated in any direction
without experiencing any such atmospheric changes.

158) If “gravity” magically dragged the atmosphere along
with the spinning ball Earth, that would mean the higher the
altitude, the faster the spinning atmosphere would have to be
turning around the center of rotation. In reality, however, if
this were happening then rain and fireworks would behave
entirely differently as they fell down through progressively
slower and slower spinning atmosphere. Hot-air balloons
would also be forced steadily faster Eastwards as they
ascended through the ever increasing atmospheric speeds.
159) If there were progressively faster and faster spinning
atmosphere the higher the altitude that would mean it would
have to abruptly end at some key altitude where the fastest
layer of gravitized spinning atmosphere meets the supposed
non-gravitized non-spinning non-atmosphere of infinite
vacuum space! NASA has never mentioned what altitude
this impossible feat allegedly happens, but it is easily
philosophically refuted by the simple fact that vacuums
cannot exist connected to non-vacuums while maintaining
the properties of a vacuum – not to mention, the effect such
a transition would have on a rocket “space ship” would be
disastrous.
160) It is impossible for rockets or any type of jet
propulsion engines to work in the alleged non-atmosphere of
vacuum space because without air/atmosphere to push
against there is nothing to propel the vehicle forwards.
Instead the rockets and shuttles would be sent spinning
around their own axis uncontrollably in all directions like a
gyroscope. It would be impossible to fly to the Moon or go
in any direction whatsoever, especially if “gravity” were real
and constantly sucking you towards the closest densest
body.

161) If Earth were really a ball, there would be no reason to
use rockets for flying into “outer-space” anyway because
simply flying an airplane straight at any altitude for long
enough should and would send you off into outer-space. To
prevent their airplanes from flying tangent to the ball-Earth,
pilots would have to constantly course-correct downwards,
or else within just a few hours the average commercial
airliner traveling 500mph would find themselves lost in
“outer-space.” The fact that this never happens, artificial
horizons remain level at pilot’s desired altitudes and do
NOT require constant downwards adjustments, proves the
Earth is not a ball.

162) All NASA and other “space agencies” rocket launches
never go straight up. Every rocket forms a parabolic curve,
peaks out, and inevitably starts falling back to Earth. The
rockets which are declared “successful” are those few which
don’t explode or start falling too soon but make it out of
range of spectator view before crashing down into restricted
waters and recovered. There is no magic altitude where
rockets or anything else can simply go up, up, up and then
suddenly just start “free-floating” in space. This is all a
science-fiction illusion created by wires, green-screens, dark
pools, some permed hair and Zero-G planes.

163) NASA and other space agencies have been caught
time and again with air bubbles forming and floating off in
their official “outer-space” footage. Astronauts have also
been caught using scuba-space-gear, kicking their legs to
move, and astronaut Luca Parmitano even almost drowned
when water started filling up his helmet while allegedly on a
“space-walk.” It is admitted that astronauts train for their

“space-walks” in under-water training facilities like NASA’s
“Neutral Buoyancy Lab,” but what is obvious from their
“space bubbles,” and other blunders is that all official
“space-walk” footage is also fake and filmed under-water.

164) Analysis of many interior videos from the
“International Space Station,” have shown the use of
camera-tricks such as green-screens, harnesses and even
wildly permed hair to achieve a zero-gravity type effect.
Footage of astronauts seemingly floating in the zero-gravity
of their “space station” is indistinguishable from “vomit
comet” Zero-G airplane footage. By flying parabolic
maneuvers this Zero-G floating effect can be achieved over
and over again then edited together. For longer uncut shots,
NASA has been caught using simple wires and green screen
technology.

165) NASA claims one can observe the International Space
Station pass by overhead proving its existence, yet analysis
of the “ISS” seen through zoom cameras proves it to be

some type of hologram/drone, not a physical floating space-
base. As you can see in my documentary “ISS Hoax,” when

zooming in/out, the “ISS” dramatically and impossibly
changes shape and color, displaying a prismatic rainbow

effect until coming into focus much like an old television
turning on/off.

166) The “geostationary communications satellite” was first
created by Freemason science-fiction writer Arthur C.
Clarke and supposedly became science-fact just a decade
later. Before this, radio, television, and navigation systems
like LORAN and DECCA were already well-established and
worked fine using only ground-based technologies.
Nowadays huge fibre-optics cables connect the internet
across oceans, gigantic cell towers triangulate GPS signals,
and ionospheric propagation allows radio waves to be
bounced all without the aid of the science-fiction best-seller
known as “satellites.”

167) Satellites are allegedly floating around in the
thermosphere where temperatures are claimed to be upwards
of 4,530 degrees Fahrenheit. The metals used in satellites,
however, such as aluminum, gold and titanium have melting
points of 1,221, 1,948, and 3,034 degrees respectively, all
far lower than they could possibly handle.

168) So-called “satellite” phones have been found to have
reception problems in countries like Kazakhstan with very
few cell phone towers. If the Earth were a ball with 20,000+
satellites surrounding, such blackouts should not regularly
occur in any rural countryside areas.
169) So-called “satellite” TV dishes are almost always

positioned at a 45 degree angle towards the nearest ground-
based repeater tower. If TV antennae were actually picking

up signals from satellites 100+ miles in space, most TV
dishes should be pointing more or less straight up to the sky.
The fact that “satellite” dishes are never pointing straight up
and almost always positioned at a 45 degree angle proves
they are picking up ground-based tower signals and not
“outer-space satellites.”

170) People even claim to see satellites with their naked
eyes, but this is ridiculous considering they are smaller than
a bus and allegedly 100+ miles away; It is impossible to see
anything so small that far away. Even using telescopes, no
one claims to discern the shape of satellites but rather
describes seeing passing moving lights, which could easily
be any number of things from airplanes to drones to
shooting stars or other unidentified flying objects.
171) NASA claims there are upwards of 20,000 satellites
floating around Earth’s upper-atmosphere sending us radio,
television, GPS, and taking pictures of the planet. All these
supposed satellite pictures, however, are admittedly
“composite images, edited in photoshop!” They claim to
receive “ribbons of imagery” from satellites which must
then be spliced together to create composite images of the
Earth, all of which are clearly CGI and not photographs. If
Earth were truly a ball with 20,000 satellites orbiting, it
would be a simple matter to mount a camera and take some
real photographs. The fact that no real satellite photographs
of the supposed ball Earth exist in favor of NASA’s
“ribbons of composite CG imagery,” is further proof we are
not being told the truth.
172) If you pick any cloud in the sky and watch for several
minutes, two things will happen: the clouds will move and
they will morph gradually changing shape. In official
NASA footage of the spinning ball Earth, such as the
“Galileo” time-lapse video however, clouds are constantly
shown for 24+ hours at a time and not moving or morphing
whatsoever! This is completely impossible, further proof

that NASA produces fake CGI videos, and further evidence
that Earth is not a spinning ball.

173) NASA has several alleged photographs of the ball-
Earth which show several exact duplicate cloud patterns!

The likelihood of having two or three clouds of the exact
same shape in the same picture is as likely as finding two or
three people with exactly the same fingerprints. In fact it is
solid proof that the clouds were copied and pasted in a

computer program and that such pictures showing a ball-
shaped Earth are fakes.

174) NASA graphics artists have placed things like faces,
dragons, and even the word “SEX” into cloud patterns over
their various ball-Earth pictures. Their recent 2015 Pluto
pictures even clearly have a picture of Disney’s “Pluto” the
dog layered into the background. Such blatant fraud goes
unnoticed by the hypnotized masses, but provides further
proof of the illegitimacy of NASA and their spinning ball
planet mythos.

175) Professional photo-analysts have dissected several
NASA images of the ball-Earth and found undeniable proof
of computer editing. For example, images of the Earth
allegedly taken from the Moon have proven to be copied and
pasted in, as evidenced by rectangular cuts found in the
black background around the “Earth” by adjusting
brightness and contrast levels. If they were truly on the
Moon and Earth was truly a ball, there would be no need to
fake such pictures.

176) When NASA’s images of the ball-Earth are compared
with one another the coloration of the land/oceans and
relative size of the continents are consistently so drastically
different from one another as to prove beyond any
reasonable doubt that the pictures are all fake.

177) In the documentary “A Funny Thing Happened on the
Way to the Moon,” you can watch official leaked NASA
footage showing Apollo 11 astronauts Buzz Aldrin, Neil
Armstrong and Michael Collins, for almost an hour, using
transparencies and camera-tricks to fake shots of a round
Earth! They communicate over audio with control in
Houston about how to accurately stage the shot, and
someone keeps prompting them on how to effectively
manipulate the camera to achieve the desired effect. First,
they blacked out all the windows except for a downward
facing circular one, which they aimed the camera towards

from several feet away. This created the illusion of a ball-
shaped Earth surrounded by the blackness of space, when in

fact it was simply a round window in their dark cabin. Neil
Armstrong claimed at this point to be 130,000 miles from

Earth, half-way to the Moon, but when camera-tricks were
finished the viewer could see for themselves the astro-nots
were not more than a couple dozen miles above the Earth’s
surface, likely flying in a high-altitude plane!

178) People claim Google Earth somehow proves the ball
model without realizing that Google Earth is simply a
composite program of images taken from high-altitude
planes and street-level car-cameras superimposed onto a
CGI model of a ball Earth. The same could be just as easily
modeled onto a square Earth or any other shape and
therefore cannot be used as proof of Earth’s rotundity.

179) If the Earth were constantly spinning Eastwards
1000mph then airplane flight durations going Eastwards vs.
Westwards should be significantly different. If the average
commercial airliner travels 500mph, it follows that
Westbound equatorial flights should reach their destination
at approximately thrice the speed as their Eastbound return
flights. In reality, however, the differences in
East/Westbound flight durations usually amount to a matter
of minutes, and nothing near what would occur on a
1000mph spinning ball Earth.
180) The spinning ball model dictates that the Earth and
atmosphere would be moving together at approximately
500mph at the mid-latitudes where an LA to NYC flight
takes place. The average commercial airliner traveling
500mph takes 5.5 hours traveling East with the alleged
rotation of the Earth, so the return flight West should take

only 2.75 hours, but in fact we find the average NYC to LA
flight takes 6 hours, a flight time totally inconsistent with
the spinning ball model.

181) Flights Eastwards with the alleged spin of the ball-
Earth from Tokyo to LA take an average of 10.5 hours,

therefore the return flights Westwards against the alleged
spin should take an average of 5.25 hours, but in actual fact
take an average of 11.5 hours, another flight time totally
inconsistent with the spinning ball model.

182) Flights Eastwards with the alleged spin of the ball-
Earth from NY to London take an average of 7 hours,

therefore the return flights Westwards against the alleged
spin should take an average of 3.5 hours, but in actual fact
take an average of 7.5 hours, a flight time totally
inconsistent with the spinning ball model.
183) Flights Eastwards from Chicago to Boston with the
alleged spin of the ball-Earth take an average of 2.25 hours,
therefore the return flights Westwards against the alleged
spin should take an average of just over an hour, but in
actual fact take an average of 2.75 hours, once again,
completely inconsistent with the spinning ball model.
184) Flights Eastwards from Paris to Rome with the alleged
spin of the ball-Earth take an average of 2 hours, therefore
the return flights Westwards against the alleged spin should
take an average of 1 hour, but in actual fact have an average
flight duration of 2 hours 10 minutes, a flight time totally
inconsistent with the spinning ball model.

185) We are told that the Earth and atmosphere spin
together at such a perfect uniform velocity that no one in
history has ever seen, heard, felt or measured the supposed
1000mph movement. This is then often compared to
traveling in a car at uniform velocity, where we only feel the
movement during acceleration or deceleration. In reality,
however, even with eyes closed, windows up, over smooth
tar in a luxury car at a mere uniform 50mph, the movement
absolutely can be felt! At 20 times this speed, Earth’s
imaginary 1000mph spin would most certainly be
noticeable, felt, seen and heard by all.

186) People sensitive to motion sickness feel distinct
unease and physical discomfort from motion as slight as an
elevator or a train ride. This means that the 1000mph
alleged uniform spin of the Earth has no effect on such
people, but add an extra 50mph uniform velocity of a car
and their stomach starts turning knots. The idea that motion
sickness is nowhere apparent in anyone at 1000mph, but
suddenly comes about at 1050mph is ridiculous and proves
the Earth is not in motion whatsoever.
187) The second law of thermodynamics, otherwise known
as the law of entropy, along with the fundamental principles
of friction/resistance determine the impossibility of Earth
being a uniformly spinning ball. Over time, the spinning
ball Earth would experience measurable amounts of drag
constantly slowing the spin and lengthening the amount of
hours per day. As not the slightest such change has ever
been observed in all of recorded history it is absurd to
assume the Earth has ever moved an inch.

188) Over the years NASA has twice changed their story
regarding the shape of the Earth. At first they maintained
Earth was a perfect sphere, which later changed to an
“oblate spheroid” flattened at the poles, and then changed
again to being “pear-shaped” as the Southern hemisphere
allegedly bulges out as well. Unfortunately for NASA,
however, none of their official pictures show an oblate
spheroid or pear-shaped Earth! All their pictures, contrary
to their words, show a spherical (and clearly CGI fake)
Earth.

189) The Bible, Koran, Srimad Bhagavatam, and many
other holy books describe and purport the existence of a
geocentric, stationary flat Earth. For example, 1 Chronicles
16:30 and Psalm 96:10 both read, “He has fixed the earth
firm, immovable.” And Psalm 93:1 says, “The world also is
stablished, that it cannot be moved.” The Bible also
repeatedly affirms that the Earth is “outstretched” as a plane,
with the outstretched heavens everywhere above (not all

around) giving a scriptural proof the Earth is not a spinning
ball.

190) Cultures the world over throughout history have all
described and purported the existence of a geocentric,
stationary flat Earth. Egyptians, Indians, Mayans, Chinese,
Native Americans and literally every ancient civilization on
Earth had a geocentric flat-Earth cosmology. Before

Pythagoras, the idea of a spinning ball-Earth was non-
existent and even after Pythagoras it remained an obscure

minority view until 2000 years later when Copernicus began
reviving the heliocentric theory.
191) From Pythagoras to Copernicus, Galileo and Newton,
to modern astronauts like Aldrin, Armstrong and Collins, to
director of NASA and Grand Commander of the 33rd degree
C. Fred Kleinknecht, the founding fathers of the spinning
ball mythos have all been Freemasons! The fact that so
many members of this, the largest and oldest secret society
in existence have all been co-conspirators bringing about
this literal “planetary revolution” is beyond the possibility of
coincidence and provides proof of organized collusion in
creating and maintaining this multi-generational deception.

192) Quoting “Terra Firma” by David Wardlaw Scott, “The
system of the Universe, as taught by Modern Astronomers,
being founded entirely on theory, for the truth of which they
are unable to advance one single real proof, they have
entrenched themselves in a conspiracy of silence, and
decline to answer any objections which may be made to
their hypotheses ... Copernicus himself, who revived the
theory of the heathen philosopher Pythagoras, and his great
exponent Sir Isaac Newton, confessed that their system of a
revolving Earth was only a possibility, and could not be
proved by facts. It is only their followers who have
decorated it with the name of an ‘exact science,’ yea,
according to them, ‘the most exact of all the sciences.’ Yet
one Astronomer Royal for England once said, speaking of
the motion of the whole Solar system: ‘The matter is left in a
most delightful state of uncertainty, and I shall be very glad
if any one can help me out of it.’ What a very sad position
for an ‘exact science’ to be in is this!”

193) No child or un-indoctrinated man in their right-mind
would ever conclude or even conceive given to their own
devices, based on their own personal observations, that the
Earth was a spinning ball revolving around the Sun! Such
imaginative theories nowhere present in anyone’s daily
experience require and have required massive amounts of
constant propaganda to uphold the illusion.

194) From David Wardlaw Scott, “I remember being taught
when a boy, that the Earth was a great ball, revolving at a
very rapid rate around the Sun, and, when I expressed to my
teacher my fears that the waters of the oceans would tumble
off, I was told that they were prevented from doing so by
Newton’s great law of Gravitation, which kept everything in
its proper place. I presume that my countenance must have
shown some signs of incredulity, for my teacher immediately

added - I can show you a direct proof of this; a man can
whirl around his head a pail filled with water without its
being spilt, and so, in like manner, can the oceans be
carried round the Sun without losing a drop. As this
illustration was evidently intended to settle the matter, I then
said no more upon the subject. Had such been proposed to
me afterwards as a man, I would have answered somewhat
as follows - Sir, I beg to say that the illustration you have
given of a man whirling a pail of water round his head, and
the oceans revolving round the Sun, does not in any degree
confirm your argument, because the water in the two cases
is placed under entirely different circumstances, but, to be of
any value, the conditions in each case must be the same,
which here they are not. The pail is a hollow vessel which
holds the water inside it, whereas, according to your
teaching, the Earth is a ball, with a continuous curvature
outside, which, in agreement with the laws of nature, could
not retain any water.”

195) Astronomers say the magical magnetism of gravity is

what keeps all the oceans of the world stuck to the ball-
Earth. They claim that because the Earth is so massive, by

virtue of this mass it creates a magic force able to hold
people, oceans and atmosphere tightly clung to the
underside of the spinning ball. Unfortunately, however,
they cannot provide any practical example of this on a scale
smaller than the planetary. A spinning wet tennis ball, for

instance, has the exact opposite effect of the supposed ball-
Earth! Any water poured over it simply falls off the sides,

and giving it a spin results in water flying off 360 degrees
like a dog shaking after a bath. Astronomers concede the
wet tennis ball example displays the opposite effect of their
supposed ball-Earth, but claim that at some unknown mass,
the magic adhesive properties of gravity suddenly kick in
allowing the spinning wet tennis ball-Earth to keep every
drop of “gravitized” water stuck to the surface. When such
an unproven theory goes against all experiments, experience
and common sense, it is high time to drop the theory.

196) Quoting Marshall Hall, “In short, the sun, moon, and
stars are actually doing precisely what everyone throughout
all history has seen them do. We do not believe what our
eyes tell us because we have been taught a counterfeit
system which demands that we believe what has never been
confirmed by observation or experiment. That counterfeit
system demands that the Earth rotate on an 'axis' every 24
hours at a speed of over 1000 MPH at the equator. No one
has ever, ever, ever seen or felt such movement (nor seen or
felt the 67,000MPH speed of the Earth's alleged orbit
around the sun or its 500,000 MPH alleged speed around a
galaxy or its retreat from an alleged 'Big Bang' at over
670,000,000 MPH!). Remember, no experiment has ever
shown the earth to be moving. Add to that the fact that the
alleged rotational speed we've all been taught as scientific
fact MUST decrease every inch or mile one goes north or
south of the equator, and it becomes readily apparent that
such things as accurate aerial bombing in WWII (down a
chimney from 25,000 feet with a plane going any direction
at high speed) would have been impossible if calculated on
an earth moving below at several hundred MPH and
changing constantly with the latitude."

197) Some people claim there is no motive for such a
grand-scale deception and that flat or a ball makes no
difference. By removing Earth from the motionless center
of the Universe, these Masons have moved us physically and
metaphysically from a place of supreme importance to one
of complete nihilistic indifference. If the Earth is the center
of the Universe, then the ideas of God, creation, and a
purpose for human existence are resplendent. But if the
Earth is just one of billions of planets revolving around
billions of stars in billions of galaxies, then the ideas of God,
creation, and a specific purpose for Earth and human
existence become highly implausible. By surreptitiously

indoctrinating us into their scientific materialist Sun-
worship, not only do we lose faith in anything beyond the

material, we gain absolute faith in materiality, superficiality,
status, selfishness, hedonism and consumerism. If there is
no God, and everyone is just an accident, then all that really
matters is me, me, me. They have turned Madonna, the
Mother of God, into a material girl living in a material
world. Their rich, powerful corporations with slick Sun-cult
logos sell us idols to worship, slowly taking over the world
while we tacitly believe their “science,” vote for their
politicians, buy their products, listen to their music, and
watch their movies, sacrificing our souls at the altar of
materialism. To quote Morris Kline, “The heliocentric

theory, by putting the sun at the center of the universe ...
made man appear to be just one of a possible host of
wanderers drifting through a cold sky. It seemed less likely
that he was born to live gloriously and to attain paradise
upon his death. Less likely, too, was it that he was the object
of God’s ministrations.”
198) Some say the idea of an inter-generational world-wide
conspiracy to delude the masses sounds implausible or
unrealistic, but these people need only familiarize
themselves with the works and writings of Freemasons
themselves, for example John Robison who exposed this in
his 1798 book, “Proofs of a Conspiracy Against All the
Religions and Governments of Europe Carried Out in the
Secret Meetings of the Freemasons, Illuminati and Reading
Societies.” Supreme Commander of the 33rd degree Albert
Pike was quite forth-coming in several letters regarding the
Masons ultimate goal of world domination, and in the
Zionist “Protocols of the Learned Elders of Zion” the exact
plan by which this would be and has been carried out is
completely disclosed.

199) From “Foundations of Many Generations” by E.
Eschini, “The one thing the fable of the revolving Earth has
done, it has shown the terrible power of a lie, a lie has the
power to make a man a mental slave, so that he dares not
back the evidence of his own senses. To deny the plain and
obvious movement of the Sun he sees before him. When he
feels himself standing on an Earth utterly devoid of motion,
at the suggestion of someone else he is prepared to accept
that he is spinning furiously round. When he sees a bird
flying, and gaining over the ground, he is prepared to
believe that the ground is really travelling a great number of
times faster than the bird, finally, in order to uphold the
imagination of a madman, he is prepared to accuse his
Maker of forming him a sensiferous lie.”
200) And finally, from Dr. Rowbotham, “Thus we see that
this Newtonian philosophy is devoid of consistency; its
details are the result of an entire violation of the laws of
legitimate reasoning, and all its premises are assumed. It is,
in fact, nothing more than assumption upon assumption, and
the conclusions derived therefrom are willfully considered
as things proved, and to be employed as truths to
substantiate the first and fundamental assumptions. Such a
‘juggle and jumble’ of fancies and falsehoods extended and
intensified as in theoretical astronomy is calculated to make
the unprejudiced inquirer revolt with horror from the
terrible conjuration which has been practised upon him; to
sternly resolve to resist its further progress; to endeavour to
over-throw the entire edifice, and to bury in its ruins the

false honours which have been associated with its
fabricators, and which still attach to its devotees. For the
learning, the patience, the perseverance and devotion for
which they have ever been examples, honour and applause
need not be withheld; but their false reasoning, the
advantages they have taken of the general ignorance of
mankind in respect to astronomical subjects, and the
unfounded theories they have advanced and defended,
cannot be otherwise than regretted, and ought to be by every
possible means uprooted.”

For more information about our Flat Earth read “The
Flat Earth Conspiracy” by Eric Dubay and visit:
http://www.AtlanteanConspiracy.com
http://www.ifers.boards.net