The Earth Is a Shell; the Sun Is the Center
IN THE Koreshan System of Cosmogony the fact must always be borne in mind that the sun is the center, and the earth is the circumferential shell or environment. The sun has three primary or first principles; namely, heat, light, and gravity. These primaries are all complex. Heat is composed of

p. 84

degrees, light of spectra, and gravity of qualities. These [so called] forces are substantial in character, and are simply the most attenuate solutions of material substances.

Heat, light, and gravity are eliminated or emitted from the sun, passing through atmospheres which modify them according to the atmospheric qualities through which they pass. Every atmosphere has something of the power of reflection and refraction, but not so much influence upon the gravic substance as upon heat and light.

Solid metals refract and reflect gravity; every quality of gravic substance being refracted by its corresponding metal more than by any other, though they all have refracting and reflecting power over all the gravic qualities of substance.

The earth is a shell having seven primary metals in layers or strata, laminæ, planes. These constitute the rind or outer crust, and act as so many great reflectors and refractors of the [so called] forces. The direct reflection of heat is cold. The direct reflection of light is darkness. The direct reflection of gravity is levity. We have, therefore, cold, darkness, and levity, which are just as much substance as the three opposite ones. At the points of change are the poles of these substances.

I have emphasized the word direct, because indirect reflection partakes less of the nature of the opposite character, as it is less direct or more indirect. These reflex substances flow back to the center as cold, darkness, and levity, and move toward the sun in circular strata, taking their courses according to order, 1 between the qualities of the outflowing substance.

To give an idea of these return flows, let us take

p. 85

the dark force [so called]. In the examination of spectra there will be noticed the dark lines. These have been termed Fraunhofer's lines. In gravic analysis corresponding levic lines would be seen, and in heat analysis corresponding cold lines would be observed. These return flows are positive to the sun but negative to the eye. The outflowing substances from the sun are negative to the sun but positive to the eye. Thus the light is apparent while the darkness is not.

Origin of the Moon and of Gravity
As these [so called] forces flow into the sun they move toward its center in a vortex, which at the center becomes so rapid that they all commingle in a homogeneous fusion. The vortex produces, a cross circle which spreads out into a thin diaphragm, dividing the sun into two halves; one anterior and the other posterior. The .central part of the sun (backward) is dark because the most intense dark "energy" seeks that point, while the central part (forward) is light. The dark "energy" moves out in the opposite direction from the light "energy." The cold "energy" moves out at one side, and the heat "energy" at the other; that is, at their most intense points.

The sun, then, has a double revolution--vertical and lateral. The vertical revolution is comparatively slow; the lateral is very rapid at the diaphragm, but less so at the back and front, or anterior and posterior points, which give to the mass the shape of two spirals or twists. Examine the heart and you will get something of an idea, as the heart represents one of the vertical halves. The diaphragm is one half-wheel cold substance, the other half-wheel heat substance. These

p. 86

substances spread out like two great wings, which extend into terminal levic rings that revolve from north to south, but not so rapidly as at the vortex and diaphragm.

The gravic substance is formative. It is more subtile and diffusive in its reflex than the other substances, and consequently more filtrative and general in its counter-flow or inflow, as it also is in its outflow, than the others; namely, light and heat. Electricity, magnetism, etc., are modifications of gravity and levity; but as these are let down toward the circumference through the atmospheres, they are directed by the power of reflection and refraction of the atmospheres. I have partially described the central sun or star center of the physical universe. We do not see the center, but only the focalization at the outer atmosphere.

To return to the diaphragm. The lateral rings, which are the peripheries of the cold and heat substances, assume the form of rings at that special relation, because a condensed ring of levity is the polaric opposite of thin laminæ, plates, or scales of gravity. The levic substance is not reformed from the mass until it is condensed at that periphery. This periphery is the aggregate positive pole of gravity, the aggregate reflex circle from the earth, and is there-fore the origin of the moon. By this you may see the truth of the Bible statement--"round tires like the moon."

What is the origin of gravity? It is the child of cold and heat. Cold is its father, and heat is its mother. The union of these produces the levic pole, the starting point of gravity, which solidifies in metallic form at the circumference--the earth.

p. 87

Cause of Day and Night; also the Four Seasons
The sun in the third atmosphere is pendant, so to speak, from the pivot at the center. As the center revolves in its vertical revolution, the pendant sun in


Cross-Sectional View of the Great Electro-Magnetic Battery, with the Sun as the Perpetual Pivot and Pole. Southern Hemisphere of the Cell
Click to enlarge
Cross-Sectional View of the Great Electro-Magnetic Battery, with the Sun as the Perpetual Pivot and Pole. Southern Hemisphere of the Cell

the third atmosphere moves in an orbit through the space of that atmosphere. This causes day and night. The lateral revolution in the sun, producing the

p. 88

diaphragm and peripheral rings (zones) of levic "force," produces the slow revolution of the cold and heat poles of the lateral cycle from north to south. From the cold pole of the zone (to midway between these extremities) it grows warmer, and from the hot pole it grows colder until the temperate is reached.

Here are four poles, the four winds of heaven, the four foundations of the earth, the four seasons. Now as heat and cold are the parents of levity, therefore, levity is at its maximum when the heat pole is south and the cold pole north; for then there is the greatest degree of heat at the south, and the greatest degree of cold at the north; but while the levic substance is at its maximum, it is not in its equilibrium in the zone, for contraction by cold diminishes it north, but increases it south. When the temperate poles are north and south there is a mini- mum degree of levic substance, but equilibrium in the zone, because the levic substance is equally distributed throughout the zone.

On the line of the ecliptic--which is the center or median line of the Zodiac--is a point of continual greatest gravity. This is a circle around the circumference, the point where the metals are thickest. This is not the equatorial line of the earth. The sun naturally pends toward this line; I mean the reflected sun in the third space or outward atmosphere. As he moves toward this line or ecliptic from north to south, or from south to north, he acquires a momentum induced by the attraction of gravity but regulated by the zone of levity.

As the sun moves north, levic substance increases gradually at that point, because expansion progresses in that direction by the action of the heat of the sum

p. 89

[paragraph continues] The expansion increases as the hot pole of the zone moves toward the north pole. When levic substance there is at its maximum, the point is reached of its greatest attraction for the gravic cycle in the ecliptic, and that side of the zone is pulled down, and the sun gets an impetus again toward the south.

As the sun moves toward the south, the levic zone increases at the south until the hot and cold poles are south and north, and the levic substance at the south, or hot pole of the zone, is at its maximum, when the attraction becomes sufficiently great again to overcome the momentum of the sun, and he takes his course again toward the north. These dippings of the rings are the moon's nodes or noddings.

These four poles, with the modifications of heat and cold in the zone, govern the sun's motion, and make the four seasons by the regulation of the sun's motion. It will be noticed that in the Koreshan System the ascending and descending nodes of the moon are accounted for, but on entirely different principles from the old theory.

The moon that we see is the transposed expansion (by reflection) of the levic zone, and the law governing the changes in the levic zone produces the moon's changes. The moon, so to speak, is the ghost of the earth, for the reason that the gravic substance takes the picture of the earth, transforms it into a ring or zone, and then again spreads the picture out against one of the atmospheres to our vision.

The stars, as distinct from the planetary system, are reflections from the central sun, back of the diaphragm, originating in the reflex flow from the diaphragm or from the vortical center. In the formation of the zone, at the extremity of the wings before

p. 90

mentioned, we have the commencement of the projected gravity. This does not extend in a continuous line outward to the circumferences or planes of the earth, but it is met by an interflow of levity, which is the point of polarity of the second degree.

The union of gravity and levity produces light, which from this second zone points forward convergently and forms an iris. This is the sun's anterior limb. The iris or rainbow is the circle around the pupil of the sun as it looks forward toward the earth. This is not seen in ordinary and uninterrupted vision; but when the spectrum from the sun is refracted by prismatic influence, this fact becomes apparent in prismatic phenomena.

In giving this anterior presentment I do so that the basis or foundation may be grounded for the efficient study of the posterior limb. The first zone mentioned is the zone of gravity. It is the first limbus, the limbus of kaneinic substance; that is, where it ceases to be in its greatest magnitude.

Meeting Point of Gravity and Levity
Gravity and levity meet at their first or highest conjunction, anterior to this zone. I have previously stated that levity was the direct reflection of gravity. Hence, at the point anterior to this zone, where the gravic and levic substances meet, at the rim or zone where the iris begins to converge, there is formed a posterior sheath or extension, constituting, in its direction toward the posterior limb, an elevated of nearly circumambient arch of levity.

This arch of levic substance is interrupted at points (cycles, rather) by effluxes backward from the posteriorly directed center from the vortex, and loses

p. 91

itself finally at a rim where the dark limb of the sun, in a posterior protrusion, forms a hole directly backward. This hole nearly corresponds to the optic nerve of the eye. It is formed by the reflex of light, and is what I have before termed scotos.

As the dark substance passes out, posteriorly, at the place of union or interruption of the circumambient sheath or dome, there is a gyre or spiral motion somewhat corresponding to the whirl at the vortex. This gyre loses itself, or merges into a fan-like protuberance. The posterior or crown is the preponderance of scotoic substance, but is intermingled with the levic substance, and also the irisic reflection. This crown is crossed up and down with striated bands.

These light bands, varying in color somewhat like the rainbow, (except that they are up and down, and do not form an iris like the rainbow,) correspond, in the dark posterior of the sun, to Fraunhofer's circular lines in the sun's anterior. I mean that when light is analyzed the dark lines are observed; but when darkness is analyzed the colored bands are seen. These bands are sometimes reflected in such a manner as to be seen in the heavens near the sun, and are called sun dogs. They no doubt derive their name from being projections from the vortex backward, as limbs of the kaneinic substance.

The bands of scotoic force are broad, while the stria are extremely thin or narrow, and stream out like so many colored fans. I call them stria, because they seem like furrows or deep grooves in the foldings of the cruosic substance.

These colored stripes nearly encircle the central orb from east to west; and as they radiate they strike an atmosphere, and, being refracted through it, point

p. 92

at substances in the formation of stars. These are the fixed stars. These colored bands do not form parallel lines like parallels of latitude, but are related to one another like degrees of longitude. The iris of the eye of the cat derives form from this factor in physical construction, although it partakes of both principles; that found in the anterior as well as in the posterior of the orb.

Cold the direct Reflection of Heat
We will now consider the cruosic or crystallic (cold) substance. This has its inception in the primitive zone, as I will now describe. In a former statement I defined the zone as having four polaric points, one of which is the caloric (heat) center or pole. It will be remembered that cruos (cold) is the direct reflection of caloris (heat).

Remember also that the zone has two movements; one from north to south, the other from east to west with the sun. The caloric pole, therefore, moves from north to south--as do all the poles. This movement from north to south, with the motion of the zone with the sun, accomplishes a caloristice corresponding to the summer and winter solstices.

The caloristitial movement is a circumpolar revolution of the caloric pole of the zone. The substance of that pole accumulates during the motion from north to south to the equator. This is gradually given off as it moves toward the south from the equator, but when it reaches its caloristitial circle, it is at the rim of its polaric aptitude; and there the heat is thrown in abundance to meet its polaric opposite. The direct reflection of this superabundance of heat is intense cold, not reflected immediately, but generated as the caloric pole of the zone moves again

p. 93

north toward the equator, and away from the circumpolar rim.

The caloric pole accumulates in potency again as it moves north toward the equator, after which it gradually yields its heat until the north rim is reached, where, in its circumpolar revolution, the caloristice, it throws off its superabundant substance, which is reflected as cruos (cold). Cruos is the substance of the Aurora Borealis, and is also seen as the corona around the sun during an eclipse.

The zone I have described is complemented by a second co-ordinating zone. The wings spreading out are lifted upward, so that this zone is above or backward from the diaphragm. The complementing zone is downward or forward. The relations of the zones, which are zones of complementary substances, are so related by the production of other substances as to form, in the completion of all their formations, relations, and unions, the cube and sphere, as also the larger zones and larger spheres, the whole of which comprises the real or true physical firmament, as fixed and solid in its structure as flint or steel; and the stars in these zones would be like diamonds in rings of steel.

These interior zones extend into space, where new zones and spheres are produced, governed by the laws regulating these interior substances, modified by the action of the earth-generated substances.

The Focal Point of all Influx. Planets Are Spheres of Physical Spirit. How Eclipses Are Produced
The astral or star center within the solar sphere is the focal point or center of all influx. All substances of every kingdom in the universe, generated as, the product of so called waste, as in the mineral, vegetable,

p. 94

and animal kingdoms, flow by graded progress toward and finally into this center. The various planetary spheres are stopping places, both from circumferences to center, and from center to circumferences; that is, spheres for the accumulation of substances. These are heaped up during the movements of planets in the aphelion, part of what is denominated their orbits.

The substance is thrown off or inter-transposed at perihelion or at the points of conjunction. These points of transposition are the centers of momentum to the physical universe. The planets are spheres of physical spirit having four primary focal points, each of these points representing the four kinds of substance in question, but each center being dominant in the manifestation of its distinctive quality.

The four qualities above referred to are mainly photos (light), scotos (dark), caloris (heat), and cruos (cold) . The spheres are arranged as shells around the astral center, between it and the general circumference, the earth. There are six of these spheres. While they comprise spheres located at six distinct distances, they are not spheres of solid substance like the earth.

When two or more focal points come in line, through the order of their regular revolution, theme is a transposition of substance, the character of the transposition being determined by the kind, quality, and peculiarity of the focal point; one effect being produced when two photos points come in conjunction; another effect by the conjunction of photos with scotos points.

The moon sphere is an aggregate shell of the reflex unity of earth and planetary spheres. It has its four focal centers or polar points on its circumference, as do the other spheres. Eclipses are dependent upon

p. 95

the relative positions of these poles to the poles of other heavenly bodies.

The light of an entire dynamosphere (sphere of substance), whether planetary or lunar, depends upon the relation of its focal points to the focal point of the helio-sphere--the sphere called the sun.

Every eclipse is produced by the crossing of the scotoic (dark) point, the pole or focus of one dynamosphere, across the photoic point or pole of another sphere.

The photoic and scotoic poles are at the opposite extremities of a given axis. If the photoic pole is toward you, the scotoic pole will be at the opposite extreme of the axes, and therefore opposite you; the photoic pole being on a line from you to the dark point. The movement of this dark pole or point across the light point of another sphere, cuts off the source of radiation to the sphere which suffers the eclipse.

Geometrical Basis of all Measurement; Limitation a Pronounced Property of Form
The geometrical basis of all measurement, namely, the unit, the duad, and the triad, must constitute the root of all mensuration and the central point of geometrical measurement and limitation. The limit of the shell of this sphere of universal life is the co-ordinate limit of material existence. Nor can geometry separate the sphere and the cube as the circular and cubical integralism of that whole comprising the material form of being, in which creation forever perpetuates itself within its own spheres of active performance.

When once it is known that there is a limit to the universal form of that material whole called the universe; that there is a definite center beyond which

p. 96

there is no material thing,--a center of space beyond which there is no space, it can then be easily understood that there must exist a co-ordinating and circumferential limit which of course must be the limitation of the sphere. The universe having a material basis, possessing all of the properties of all material things, must certainly embrace every property of form, because every material thing has some kind of form.

Limitation is one of the most pronounced properties of form; therefore, the material part of the universe, having the properties of all material things, must have limitation. The belief in the illimitability of the universe has its co-ordinate in the idea of a division of matter in which, though it has been conceived that there was an atom, and that it was indivisible, there is yet a possibility of the atoms being shivered into still other, lesser particles, and these into still greater minutia,--because the idea of divisibility does not meet the question of so called scientific definition as to illimitability.

There is a limit to magnitude; there is also a corresponding and co-ordinate limit to minuteness. There is a point of indivisibility (this is the geometric point, the minutest quantity of matter), and agitation at this point (the friction which it cannot resist) will reduce it beyond the material state to its metaphysical condition, in which there are none of the properties of matter; it is then the substance which, though no longer matter, is nevertheless as substantial as it was when in the condition or state of matter from which it was reduced, and from which it came.

We not only possess a knowledge of the correlation

p. 97

of the so called energies, but the correlation of the various kinds of material substance,--that correlation which determines the interchangeability of two co-ordinate substances, matter and its coextensive and correlate ether or spirit, or its essence.

