READING UNIVERSITY DEBATING JOURNAL

September 19, 2019

Man-Made Climate Change Does not Exist!
• Piers Corbyn argues that Man-made Global Warming caused by CO2
is “nonsense”. Instead, he argues that “In the long run CO2 levels are
an EFFECT NOT A CAUSE of changes in Climate / temperatures,” and
that it is the sun that drives climate.
• He challenges whoever is willing in Reading University or other appropriate institutions to a debate on the failed Global Warming
scam vs evidence-based science.
• Piers Corbyn is an astrophysicist and Director of WeatherAction long
range (months and years ahead) forecasts. He has a First class degree
in Physics from Imperial College and an MSc in Astrophysics from
Queen Mary College. He has published numerous peer-reviewed scientific papers, starting from an early age, on subjects ranging from
meteorology to cosmology and galaxy formation and has presented
at many international conferences.
The mainstream media peddle the claim that 97% of (climate) scientists believe in man-made Global-Warming and that, therefore, there is no debate
to be had on the subject. This is false and irrelevant. To get the 97% figure,
they basically counted people who had mentioned Climate-Change in an abstract or heading of a scientific paper. Dr Legates* has reviewed the work
and shows that, in fact, only 0.3% of the papers claim that ‘man had caused
most post-1950 warming’. Nonetheless, science isn’t about consensus, it is
about facts; and no Global-Warming Inquisition is going to prevent me exposing their nonsensical theories. So here goes.
1
READING UNIVERSITY DEBATING JOURNAL
*Dr David Legates, Science & Education
22:2007–2017, 2013
September 19, 2019
“... not only is the man-made Global Warming story false, the tax and control
policies pursued because of it are hugely damaging for ordinary people.”
The CO2 “Climate-Emergency” story says that the trace gas
CO2 (0.04% of air) is the main “control knob” of
weather extremes and climate, and that Man’s CO2 – 4% of
0.04% of the atmosphere – is a major dangerous factor in
this. Therefore, the story concludes, you must be taxed and
controlled.
To put that in perspective, imagine if the whole atmosphere is represented by a rod the height of Big Ben’s tower
(316ft); the level of CO2 in the atmosphere is about 1.5
inches (38mm) on top and Man’s contribution to that CO2 is
between 1 & 2 mm – a pigeon dropping – on top. Look at
the Big Ben picture and think about what climate alarmists
are claiming!
For the CO2 narrative to be true REQUIRES:
1. Man’s (4%) CO2 to controls the rest of (96%) CO2.
2. CO2 to be the main controller of temperature and climate.
BOTH CLAIMS FAIL AGAINST SCIENCE, and are not made any less false by
any number of new or old ‘celebs’ generating large carbon footprints by attending “Save-The-Planet” stunts where they tell us all to not fly, not eat
meat, not drive cars, not breath etc. Nor do the industrial scale official temperature data set “adjustments”, alarmist forecasts which never come true,
or the hysterical propaganda claims of “record” heat at questionably selected urban heat islands, make falsity valid.
The first contention, the idea that Man’s CO2 controls the rest of natural
CO2 – plant growth and decay, termite CO2/Methane production (which is
significantly more in net supposed “greenhouse” effect than Man’s – and
2
thus it is questionable as to why we have not declared war on termites), volcanoes etc etc. – is an absurd conspiracy theory of nature. There is no evidence for this madness. Do termites increase CO2 production when you ride
in a bus around your town, simply because your CO2 is human produced?
The second assertion, that CO2 controls climate is negated by observations.
In the long run CO2 levels are an EFFECT NOT A CAUSE of changes in
Climate / temperatures. Sea temperatures rule CO2 as the oceans hold 50
times more CO2 than the atmosphere. If the sea warms, CO2 is released
(like warming a glass of fizzy drink) and if it cools it absorbs CO2 from the
air. This happens on a daily/weekly/monthly/yearly basis and on average
CO2 in the whole atmosphere stays around for a few years before going
back into the upper levels of the ocean or into the soil; CO2 levels in these
relatively small changes LAG behind temperature changes. [REF.1,2,3,4,5,8]
On longer time scales extra CO2 emitted from the sea surface in warm
periods gets swallowed up into the cold deep ocean by currents off e.g.
Greenland and emerges 500-800 years later in the air over the Pacific etc.
after a long deep sea trek - see below. So, the amount of CO2 in the atmosphere, over the long run, is an effect, and not a cause, of temperatures and
lags behind the climate by about 500-800years.
3
4
This is backed up by observable scientific data. On the scale of decades
over the last hundred or so years, and in spite of what climate alarmists
claim, CO2 has been steadily rising while temperatures have oscillated –
half the time moving with CO2 and half against – see graph on page 3 of
USA temps (pink+black) & CO2 (green). Over a longer period, ice-core data
shows that CO2 levels, smoothed over centuries, FOLLOW world CLIMATE
temperatures by about 500-800years. This is shown in the graph below
(Note here that Time is Right to Left).
The current increase in CO2 levels in the last 100 years is an after effect of
the medieval warm period. This took place around 500-800 years ago and
was warmer than our current period, despite having fewer people burning
fewer fossil fuels, by about one degree worldwide, or at least two degrees
in parts of temperate zones. It was a period of economic boom for most of
Europe where crops grew faster etc. But most importantly, it was the heat5
At the end of the last
ice age temperature
changes LEAD CO2
by 800yrs
Similar leads are in
Antarctic Termination III
240kyr ago.(Caillon et al.
Science March 03)
CO2 diffuses through ice
CO2 data points are, at best,
200 yrs apart and show only
small variations between
points. This is because CO2
is a gas and diffuses into centuries of ice layers. The
present CO2 spike will
amount to a mere blip in
1,000 years’ time.
There is NO Evidence
that the present CO2
rapid rise in unique.
Inconvenient Truths
for GW Orthodoxy!
ing during that period which has been driving the rising CO2 in the atmosphere over the last hundred or so years.
This “tail wagging dog” problem is known to Climate Scientists. Their response is something like “Yes but the extra CO2 that comes off AFTER temperatures go up then makes it extra warm.” This assumes what it’s trying to
show – that CO2 has warming powers – and means there would have to be
another peak or raising of temperatures AFTER the peak or top level in
CO2. THAT IS NOT OBSERVED (check the graph on page 5 for yourself).

6
*Originally established by Prof Hubert Lamb (UEA-CRU) and accepted by the IPCC in 1990.
 †Hockey stick graph REF.6
• The contentious - widely shown by the BBC, Exinction Rebelion and the IPCC -
“Hockey Stick” graph, showing pretty uniform world temperatures for a thousand
years until a recent supposed man made large increase, is now proven fraud.
• The recent court judgement in Canada in which Michael Mann lost his libel against
Tim Ball for refusing to provide evidence that his (in)famous graph wasn’t fraud
means the main icon and evidence of the Global warmist lobby is destroyed.
Global warmist Iconic Hockey stick graph is fraud - Official
The idea that CO2 has magic warming powers is based on Fake
Physics!
The BBC and schools use a “back radiation” explanation of Global warming
by a “CO2 blanket” – that is, the increased CO2 in the atmosphere forms a
blanket preventing heat returning into space, thus keeping the Earth warm.
An American double-glazing company apparently believed this nonsense
and tried to make “better double glazing” by putting CO2 into the interglass space – yes, they went bust... [REF.7]
This is because it is contrary to basic physics! Objects in a “radiation
enclosure” will actually balance out to the same temperature (reach equilibrium) independent of their colour (Physics is non-racist!). A white, grey or
black ball will warm at different rates, yes, but they reach the same temperature (absorption=emissions) – and this is the same for regions of CO2 enriched air. Indeed, if their nonsensical theory was true, the CO2 would emit
more heat than it would absorb, from which we could power a heat engine
forever, thus breaking the first law of thermodynamics (as we get
something for nothing). The second law of thermodynamics (a receiving object cannot get hotter than its source) is also broken, because the theory requires extra CO2 in the atmosphere to get extra warm compared with its
7
The CO2 double glazing
business that went bust!
The idea was that the CO2
sandwiched between the
glass panes sends extra
heat “back” to the inside.
Really? Why not send extra
heat “back” to the other side
(“outside”)? The window
does not know which side is
which! What if the CO2
sandwich window is
between two rooms at the
same temperature? It sends
extra heat to both? Where
did the extra heat come
from?
Something for nothing
again! - Bad Physics!
“Inside”
“Outside”
CO2
Sandwich
source (the earth), which it sends back making the ground extra warm – like
a Ponzi scam investment scheme! In other words the “back-radiation” model of Greenhouse effect is delusional nonsense.
“...data shows that CO2 levels... FOLLOW world CLIMATE temperatures by
about 500-800years.”
Better scientists know that the CO2 blanket / “back radiation” theory is bad
physics and resort to another more valid explanation, but which, in the end,
also fails. The better approach is to examine the lapse rate – the fall in temperature as we go higher in the atmosphere, or the height above ground at
which heat (radiation) escapes into space; the existence of the lapse rate actually has nothing to do with CO2 or any other so called “greenhouse” gas.
Nonetheless, if there are more greenhouse gasses around – CO2 etc. – the
height at which radiation can more easily escape, all things being equal,
goes up. This slightly deeper (from radiation outgoing “top” to ground) atmosphere leads to the ground getting warmer (because you go further
down from there to reach the ground). That all sounds OK (even if a small
effect)! However, this model also says that with more CO2 the upper atmosphere at a certain level will get warmer. Based on this, a hotspot above the
equator was predicted as CO2
increased from 2000 to 2010.
However the hotspot turned
out to be a coldspot!
Why did the theory’s predictions fail? Because physicists
were trying to over-simplify
reality. The heat-exit height is
not at a static temperature but
has day night fluctuations which get larger when there is more CO2 (and
other “greenhouse” gasses) and this makes more cooling (further explained
in box Fake Physics sorted - More Detail) – thus giving us the observed
cold spot (which, lapse-rated to the ground, makes a relative cooling which
can negate the original expected surface warming). See pages 9 & 10.
8
Fake Physics sorted - More Detail
The reason is that radiation goes as
the 4th power of temperature and the
mean of a range of 4th powers is bigger than the 4th power of the mean
[e.g. Take 1,2,3; (1^4-3^4)/2=41 which
is bigger than 2^4=16].
9
So, if sea temperatures rule CO2, what rules climate temperature?
The Sun rules the climate! See page 3, ‘60 year cycle’. Smoothed world temperatures are nothing to do with CO2 and follow solar activity. In the first
graph above, the black dotted line is added to show the ~60year solarmagnetic/Lunar cycle which we at www.WeatherAction.com http://bit.ly/2GA0MQv
10
Alley, R. B. 2004 GISP2 Ice Core Temperature and Accumulation Data IGBP PAGES/World Data Center for Paleoclmatology
Data Contribution Series #2004-013. NOAA/NGDC Paleochmatology Program, Boulder CO, USA ‘Current Temp: Box JE. Yang
L. Bromwich DH. Bai L (2009) *Greenland Ice Sheet Surface Air Temperature Variability: 1840-2007, American Meteorological
Society, Journal of Climate Vol 22, pp 4029 - 4049
show as the main likely cause of fluctuations in climate temperature over
the last century. Likewise, previous Little Ice Ages all occurred when solar
activity was low – e.g. the Maunder Minimum (~1645-1715) and Dalton
Minimum (~1790-1830); see page 6 for the Ball-Lamb temperature graph and below for more warm periods. Yes, the sun, that big ball in the sky, is far more
important for the climate than we are...
Indeed, the sun’s current activity suggests that another new Little-Ice Age
is upon us. The recent low activity solar cycle 24 and expected low cycle 25
mean we are at the early part of another Little Ice Age. There are many subcycles especially involving the magnetic solar (“Hale”) cycle (~22yrs NOT the
~11yr cycle), and Timo Niroma showed that 10 Hale cycles give an approx
(smoothed out) repeating pattern of solar activity and hence
~Temperatures. The last 10,000 years – the relatively warm ‘interglacial’
period since the last ice age – has had 10 sub peaks of warmth. The previous 9 have all been warmer than this one while they had LESS CO2. This
peak, smoothed on scales of say ~60yrs, has ended – and the true peak was
probably ~1930s/40s judged (eg) by the annual number of days 100F & 110F
are exceeded in USA. The ~22yr and ~60yr fluctuations are smaller. This
says one thing. We’re at the knee of the expected curve match with ~221
yrs ago. Another Dalton/Maunder level minimum is upon us.
Our current weather extremes match a developing little ice age. This
year’s weather extremes
and contrasts, which
were well predicted in
long range by
www.WeatherAction.com
come from wild, on average south-shifted, jet
stream swings. These are
the wrong type of extremes for the CO2 story
which must have a generally warmer world and so
a North shifted, shorter,
less wavy Jet stream. Occasional EXTREME hot blasts and extreme cold peri11
ods, as we have been experiencing, are a signature of Little-Ice-Age circulation: for example, some weeks of the hot ‘Belgian Wind’ 1666 parched
London but the Thames froze many times in Winters around then.
The BBC, mainstream media, establishment and energy companies recognise this. They usually respond with dishonest exaggerations of heat using
dodgy urban heat island data to pretend the world’s warming when it’s now
cooling. Their data “adjustments” (fraud) which have likely “increased” recent temps by about 0.5 to 1C have been exposed by the late Christopher
Booker*, Tony Heller: www.realclimatescience.com, and www.weatheraction.com.
The figure is a sample of their hype; also, see the box on page 6 Global
warmist iconic hockey stick graph exposed a fraud.
Indeed, in 2004 I presented to the elite Global Oil Summit, Houston
Texas where I was well received by the various attendees (including
Director of Iraqi oil, the US military, Putin’s chief economic and science
policy advisor etc.). Afterwards the then (retiring) Chief Executive of a major
oil giant came to me and showed similar graphs to what we had produced
12 * See Paul Homewood’s blog: www.notalotofpeopleknowthat.wordpress.com
saying that they were ‘on the case’ and wanted my ‘independent corroboration’. Following this, we decided that we would approach oil companies for
money (along with the UN so we could keep impartial), but the oil companies came straight back with, “We like Mr. Corbyn’s work but we will not be
able to fund him because we don’t want to upset the Green Lobby.” From
this event in 2004 the Oil companies accepted Solar activity drives climate
but decided to go with the CO2-driver fake science to make higher profits
(from rising oil prices) and have stuck with that position and are happy to
be portrayed as a false enemy of the (so-called) Green Lobby as long as it
boosts profits. Their deal with governments is that (see their websites via
my Presentation http://bit.ly/2GA0MQv they go along with anti-CO2 measures
“as long as there is a uniform price for carbon across the board”. Hence the increased energy charges (subsidies) needed to make biofuels, wind farms etc
“economic” mean a huge ongoing increase in their profits. Note on a world
scale only 2% of energy is “sustainable”.
“Our current weather extremes match a developing little-ice age.”
However, not only is the man-made Global Warming story false, the tax
and control policies pursued because of it are hugely damaging for ordinary people. It is these green policies which have been de-industrialising our
country (which really just exports – not reduces – CO2 emissions abroad at
the expense of jobs in Britain), increasing energy prices for the poorest, and
causing mass power cuts in developing countries*. The population of bats,
birds and pollinating insects is endangered by wind farms, and EU regulations push for deadly flammable building insulation – as in Grenfell Tower
(details from: philip.foster17@ntlworld.com). Millions die of fuel poverty related causes due to Climate policies every year. The largest victim group is
African women suffering & dying from smoke inhalation due to open cooking fires because “sustainable” climate policies hold back coal-fired power
station electrification of Africa (and thus hold back economic development)
– effectively, UN-EU Climate policy is racist. I Could Go On.
It is for this reason that I, Piers Corbyn, challenge whoever is willing in
Reading University or other appropriate institutions to a debate on the
failed Global warming scam vs evidence-based science.
* Also in the UK in August 2019 13
Campaigns
• Join in #Action4Life! #CO2isGOOD4You! #RealGreenNotFakeGreen!
• The BBC must answer #Scientists4Truth challenge – Give evidence
CO2 drives Climate.
References
1. On short time scales of changes involving sea surface and land with
air CO2 changes LAG temperature changes by ~10 months, ref. Salby.
2. See Mike Haseler (on Prof Murry Salby) Climate: What we know and
What we don’t [abbr. MH-MS below], Fig 12, ISBN 1901546640 via St
Matthew Publishing philip.foster17@ntlworld.com
3. The large slow changes of CO2 involving deep sea cold water subduction lagging temperature by ~500-800yrs are imposed on shorter
term changes smoothed over ~decades, involving land and sea
surfaces.
4. The ‘lifetime’ of CO2 in air is a few years. It must be a fraction of CO2
decay time (~9yrs) for CO2 containing C14 created by nuclear testing
[MH-MS]. Prof Salby soundly shows IPCC (Bern Model) claims for
longer lifetimes are false.
5. The main sources of CO2 into the atmosphere are from Tropics NOT
from the industrial Usa-Europe-China temperate belt [MH-MS showing
SCIAMACHY satellite].
6. Article further detailing the Hockey Stick case:
http://www.mikesmithenterprises
blog.com/2019/08/the-iconic-image-of-global-warming.html?m=1
7. principia-scientific.org April 7th 2016.
https://principia-scientific.org/industry-experts-co2-worse-useless-trap
ping-heatdelaying-cooling-2/
8. Prof. Murry Salby lectures:
1st lecture Nov 2013 www.youtube.com/watch?v=uTpSlhGiHEQ
2nd Lecture 17th March 2015 in London:
www.youtube.com/watch?v=rCya4LilBZ8
3rd Lecture 18th July 2016 at UCL
www.youtube.com/watch?v=sGZqWMEpyUM
14
Websites and Twitter feeds:
www.weatheraction.com @piers_corbyn @action4life_
www.notalotofpeopleknowthat.wordpress.com
www.realclimatescience.com @tonyheller
www.climatedepot.com @climatedepot
www.tallbloke.wordpress.com
www.climatescienceinternational.org
www.wattsupwiththat.com
www.climaterealists.com @climaterealists
www.climateaudit.org
www.noconsensus.org
www.iceagenow.com
www.joannenova.com.au
www.heartland.org
www.cfact.org
www.skyfall.fr
www.pcc15.org
@peikko763
@drwaheeduddin
@drtimball
@junkscience
Documentary:
The Great Global Warming Swindle www.youtube.com/watch?v=oYhCQv5tNsQ
Books:
Darwall, Rupert, Green Tyranny, Encounter books, 2017
Delingpole, James, Watermelons, Biteback Publishing 2012
Klaus, Václav, Blue Planet in Green Shackles, Competitive Enterprise Institute, 2008
Lawson, Nigel An Appeal to Reason, Duckworth 2008
Lewin, Bernie, Searching for the Catastrophe Signal, GWPF, 2017
Lomborg, Bjørn, the skeptical environmentalist, C.U.P 2002
Montford A.W. Hiding the Decline, Anglosphere Books 2012
Plimer, Ian, Not for Greens, Connor Court 2014
Spencer, Roy W., The Great Global Warming Blunder, Encounter Books 2010
Vahrenholt, Fritz & Lüning, Sebastian, The Neglected Sun, Stacey 2013