The Myth of Dangerous Human-Caused Climate Change
R M Carter1
Whether dangerous human-caused climate
change is a fact, possibly a fact or a fabrication
depends on who you choose to believe. Many of
us line up somewhere between probable and
possible on this spectrum. (John Roskam,
Australian Financial Review, 2006.)
I have been dismayed over the bogus science and
media hype associated with the (dangerous)
human-induced global warming hypothesis. My
innate sense of how the atmosphere-ocean
functions does not allow me to accept these
scenarios. Observations and theory do not
support these ideas. (Professor Emeritus William
Gray, Colorado State University, 2006.)
ABSTRACT
Human-caused global warming has become the environmental cause
celebre of the early 21st century. The strong warming alarmist camp
currently includes the United Nations, most Western governments, most
of the free press, many large corporations (including Enron, before it
failed), the major churches, most scientific organisations and a large
portion of general public opinion. This phalanx of support
notwithstanding there is no scientific consensus as to the danger of
human-induced climate change. There is, therefore, a strong conflict
between the level of public alarm and its scientific justification. How can
this be?
In a democracy, the media serve to convey to the public the facts and
hypotheses of climate change as provided by individual scientists,
governmental and international research agencies, and NGO and other
lobby groups. In general, the media have promulgated an alarmist cause
for climate change; they have certainly failed to convey the degree of
uncertainty that is characteristic of climate science, or a balanced
summary of the many essential facts that are relevant to human causation.
Climate change is as much a geological as it is a meteorological issue.
Natural climate changes, both warmings and coolings, are indeed a
societal hazard. We usually deal with geological hazards by providing
civil defence authorities and the public with accurate, evidence-based,
general information about events like earthquakes, volcanic eruptions,
tsunamis and floods, and then by adapting to the effects when a damaging
event occurs. As for other major natural disasters, the appropriate
preparation for extreme climate events is to mitigate and manage the
negative effects when they occur, and especially so for dangerous
coolings. Attempting instead to ‘stop climate change’ by reducing human
carbon dioxide emissions is a costly exercise of utter futility. Rational
climate policies must be based on adaptation to dangerous change as and
when it occurs, and irrespective of its sign or causation.
The issue now is no longer climate change as such, the reality of which
will always be with us. Rather, the issues are, first, the failure of the free
press to inform the public about the true facts of human-caused climate
change and of the dangers posed by natural climate change. And, second,
the vested interests held by many of the groups of warming alarmists.
These interests include not only the obvious commercial ones, but also
the many scientists and science managers who have discounted or
remained silent about the huge uncertainties of the human-caused global
warming hypothesis because it suited them to do so. Public opinion will
soon demand an explanation as to why experienced editors and hardened
investigative journalists, worldwide, have melted before the blowtorch of
self-induced guilt, political correctness and special interest expediency
that marks the sophisms of global warming alarmists.
INTRODUCTION
In a recent letter to European heads of state, British Prime
Minister Tony Blair wrote: ‘We have a window of only ten to 15
years to take the steps we need to avoid crossing a catastrophic
(climate) tipping point’. In contrast, Emeritus Professor Gray, a
distinguished climate scientist from the University of Colorado,
said recently ‘Observations and theory do not support these
ideas (of dangerous human-caused warming)’. These statements
cannot both be true. Who is right, and how should members of
the public make up their minds on the matter?
That climate changes frequently, rapidly and sometimes
unpredictably has been conventional knowledge amongst earth
environmental scientists since the early days of ocean drilling in
the 1970s. Yet we do not read about such natural climate change
in the everyday news. Instead, in 2007 the daily media, in pursuit
of circulation needs, is full of doom and gloom about
human-caused global warming. Climate alarmism is propagated
by a diverse group of journalists, environmental lobbyists,
scientific and business groups, church leaders and politicians, all
of whom preach that we must ‘stop climate change’ by severely
reducing human carbon dioxide emissions, two propositions that
compete in impracticality.
There are many qualified persons who argue against such an
alarmist interpretation of recent and likely future climate change.
I am one. When referred to politely, such persons are badged as
‘climate sceptics’; nearly as often they are disparaged as ‘climate
septics’, ‘climate deniers’ or ‘flat earthers’. The denigration
implicit in the word sceptic is interesting in itself, because
virtually all scientists – whether they support the alarmist views
of the UN’s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
or are of more independent mind – accurately view themselves as
professional sceptics, for that is what scientists are trained to be.
A more appropriate term for persons who are critical (on
balanced scientific grounds) of the IPCC’s alarmism is either
‘climate agnostics’ or ‘climate rationalists’ – the latter term, in
particular, reflecting the primacy that such persons give to
empirical data and thinking. The climate rationalist approach
contrasts markedly with the untestable worlds of computer
virtual reality that so many climate alarmists now inhabit.
Much public discussion on global warming is underpinned by
two partly self-contradictory assumptions. The first is that there
is a ‘consensus’ of qualified scientists that dangerous humancaused global warming is upon us; and the second is that
although there are ‘two sides to the debate’, the dangerouswarming side is overwhelmingly the stronger. Both assertions are
unsustainable. The first because science is not, nor ever has been,
about consensus, but about experimental and observational data
and testable hypotheses. Second, regarding the number of sides
to the debate, reality is that small parts of the immensely
complex climate system are better or less understood –
depending upon the subject – by many different groups of
experts. No one scientist, however brilliant, ‘understands’ climate
change, and there is no general theory of climate nor likely to be
one in the near future. In effect, there are nearly as many sides to
the climate change debate as there are expert scientists who
consider it.
Some key questions and answers that are relevant to the
climate change debate include the following. Is there an
established Theory of Climate? Answer: no. Do we understand
fully how climate works? No. Is carbon dioxide demonstrated to
be a dangerous atmospheric pollutant? No. Can deterministic
The AusIMM New Leaders’ Conference Brisbane, QLD, 2 - 3 May 2007 61
1. Professor, Marine Geophysical Laboratory (Node C), Sporing Road
South, James Cook University, Townsville Qld 4811.
Email: bob.carter@jcu.edu.au
computer models predict future climate? Another no. Is there a
consensus amongst qualified scientists that dangerous,
human-caused climate change is upon us? Absolutely not. Did
late 20th century temperature rise at a dangerous rate, or to a
dangerous level? No, in either case. Is global temperature
currently rising? Surprisingly, no. And finally, is the IPCC a
scientific or a political advisory body? Answer: it is both.
This paper provides an analysis of these questions and some
related issues. It is intended to provide easy reading more than to
be an exhaustive analysis of the published scientific research that
underpins its conclusions. Readers interested in more detail and a
more complete bibliography should consult publications such as
Carter et al (2006); de Freitas (2002); Gerhard, Harrison and
Hanson (2001); IPCC (2001); Khandekar, Murty and Chittibabu
(2005); Khilyuk and Chilingar (2006); Kininmonth (2004);
Lindzen (2006); Jaworowski (2007) and Philander (1998), or
browse some of the web sites listed later.
THEORY OF CLIMATE
There is no established theory of climate in the sense that there is
a theory of Newtonian mechanics. It is part of the nature of
established theories that they have been repeatedly tested against
empirical data, from which derives their predictive power. Such
theories have their birth in hypotheses.
The currently favoured hypothesis of dangerous global
warming includes the presumption that late 20th century
warming was substantially caused by human emissions of the
greenhouse gas carbon dioxide. As will be elaborated later, this
theory has failed the three main tests to which it has been
subjected. First, no close relationship exists between the 20th
century patterns of increasing carbon dioxide and changing
temperature; second, 20th century rates and magnitude of
temperature change fall well within previous natural limits of
change despite accompanying increases in human-sourced
carbon dioxide; and, third, the deterministic computer models
that are used to engender public alarm have proved unable to
predict the course of temperature change over the period 1990 -
2006, let alone out to 2100.
Richard Lindzen, the distinguished US atmospheric scientist,
recently wrote in the UK Telegraph: ‘After all, like hurricane
frequency or the price of oil, global mean temperature is as likely
to go down as up’. This observation, which is accurate, suggests
that if there is to be a theory of climate for frequencies shorter
than Milankovitch-scale variations (100 000, 41 000 and 19 000/
23 000 year climate cycles) then it might turn out to be that
climate changes stochastically, as indeed has recently been
suggested by Ditlevsen (2007) for the millennial cycles termed
Dansgaard-Oeschger events. Instead, in place of such a theory at
the moment there is a hypothesis of anthropogenic global
warming (AGW). It has been tested, and fails.
HOW DOES CLIMATE WORK?
If there is no theory of climate, then how much do we know
about how climate works? The answer – as detailed in such
useful references as Philander (1998), IPCC (2001), Ruddiman
(2001), Kininmonth (2004) and Singer and Avery (2006) – is ‘a
very great deal, though not yet enough to predict its future with
any certainty’. And we would certainly hope that the first part of
this answer were true, because at least US$50 billion dollars has
been expended on climate change research since 1990. As
discussed in more detail later, it is noteworthy that this large
expenditure, and the extended efforts of the many talented
scientists supported by it, have in 2007 still not provided
convincing evidence for a measurable human effect on global
climate.
There are many subdisciplines of research relevant to climate
change, including meteorology, climatology, atmospheric
chemistry and physics, geology, palaeoceanography, quaternary
science, mathematics-statistics and modelling. So different
groups of scientists know a lot about different parts of the
climate jigsaw. The subdisciplines at the beginning of this list are
concerned mostly with weather and climate processes, those in
the middle with climate history, and the two at the end with data
processing and virtual reality. The climate advice that
governments receive, mostly through the IPCC, is heavily
influenced by scientists whose prime interests are climate
processes and imaginary virtual reality, and very light-on on
information from experts in ancient climate change. And therein
lies one of the fatal weaknesses of the IPCC.
IS CARBON DIOXIDE A DANGEROUS
POLLUTANT?
Carbon dioxide (CO2) is a colourless, odourless gas that has been
present in earth’s atmosphere through time in trace amounts
ranging from a few hundred to a few thousand parts per million
(ppm). Average atmospheric values over the last few hundred
thousand years are inferred from ice cores to have been about
180 ppm during glacials and 280 ppm during interglacials (eg
Petit et al, 1999) (Figure 1). Hurd (2006), Jaworowski (2007) and
others have argued that these values are about 30 - 50 per cent
lower than the original atmospheric values that they purport to
represent, because of the post-depositional diffusion and mixing
that occurs within the compacting ice mass. Independent
evidence from fossil plant stomata indicates that carbon dioxide
levels during the Holocene were variable on a decadal-centennial
scale compared with the monotonic curve delineated by the ice
cores (Figure 1, inset), and reached at least the present day
(post-industrial) value of 380 ppm (Kurschner et al, 1996;
Wagner, Aaby and Visscher, 2002; Kouwenberg et al, 2005)
(Figure 2). More support for decadal fluctuations of carbon
dioxide comes from the compilation and summary of 90 000
historical atmospheric analyses back to the mid-19th century by
Beck (2007).
In any case, and irrespective of these uncertainties, all
estimates of carbon dioxide levels during the recent past are very
low by the standards of earlier geological history, for planetary
carbon dioxide values have declined from around 1000 ppm in
the early Cenozoic, 60 million years ago (Lowenstein and
Demicco, 2006) (Figure 3). It is therefore crystal clear that there
is nothing inherently unusual, nor necessarily dangerous, about
the ‘extra’ carbon dioxide that is currently being contributed to
the atmosphere by human activity, which anyway amounts
annually to only about three per cent of the natural flux. Together
with oxygen, carbon dioxide is a staff of life for earth’s biosphere
because the metabolism of plants depends upon its absorption.
Increasing carbon dioxide in the range of about 200 - 1000 ppm
has repeatedly been shown to be beneficial for plant growth, and
to increase plants’ efficiency of water use (Eamus, 1996; Saxe,
Ellsworth and Heath, 1998; Robinson et al, 1998). Prima facie,
therefore, there is no reason to assume that atmospheric carbon
dioxide levels of 500 - 1000 ppm are dangerous, or that such
levels would have dramatically adverse ecological effects.
Rather, increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide over this range is
mostly beneficial (Idso, 2001; and many papers listed at the web
site CO2 Science).
Following from this discussion, that carbon dioxide is, by
definition, not a pollutant has been a cause of constant
exasperation to those environmental activists who fear global
warming. This exasperation underlies a current US Supreme
Court case brought by the State of Massachusetts against the
Environmental Protection Agency. Those bringing the action
hope that the Court will declare that carbon dioxide should come
under the Clean Air Act, and thereby be defined as a ‘pollutant’
and require regulation by the US Environmental Protection
Agency.
62 Brisbane, QLD, 2 - 3 May 2007 The AusIMM New Leaders’ Conference
R M CARTER
The AusIMM New Leaders’ Conference Brisbane, QLD, 2 - 3 May 2007 63
THE MYTH OF DANGEROUS HUMAN-CAUSED CLIMATE CHANGE
FIG 1 - Atmospheric carbon dioxide, temperature and methane levels for the last 420 000 years as reconstructed from the Vostok ice core,
Antarctica (after Petit et al, 1999). Note the remarkable coincidence of timing of variations in atmospheric temperature (middle curve) and
the two greenhouse gases. In terms of cause and effect, however, it is apparent at higher resolution that the changes in temperature
precede the changes in carbon dioxide by about 800 years (eg Mudelsee, 2001).
FIG 2 - Reconstruction of paleo-atmospheric carbon dioxide levels for the last 1800 years inferred from stomatal density in fossil pine
needles (Tsuga heterophylla), northwestern USA (after Kouwenberg, 2005, Figure 5.4). Black line: three-point running average, based on
305 needles per data point; grey shading: error estimate. Open diamonds and squares indicate, respectively, measurements from the Taylor
Dome and Law Dome ice cores, Antarctica. The ice core data represent generalised averages, and appear not to preserve the
decadal-centennial changes in atmospheric carbon dioxide indicated by the stomatal measurements.
FIG 3 - Atmospheric carbon dioxide levels for the last 60 million years, reconstructed from leaf stomata, boron isotopes, paleosols,
alkenones and the GEOCARB III geochemical model; wide bars at ~1, 22 and 50 million years BP are estimates from the Green River
(nahcolite), Beypazari and Searles Lake trona deposits (after Lowenstein and Demicco, 2006, Figure 1). Despite the variability inherent in
estimates using such a wide range of methods, the data indicate enhanced levels of ~1500 ppm in the early Cenozoic, 60 million years ago,
declining to a few hundred ppm by 20 million years ago. Modern biota therefore live in a carbon dioxide-impoverished environment
compared with their recent ancestors.
Though not a pollutant, it is nonetheless the case that carbon
dioxide absorbs space-bound infrared radiation, thereby
increasing the energy available at Earth’s surface for warming or
increased evaporation (eg de Freitas, 2002). Radiation theory
thus accepted, there remain four problems with turning an
increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide into global warming
alarmism. First, the relationship between increasing carbon
dioxide and increasing temperature is logarithmic, which lessens
the forcing effect of each successive increment of carbon dioxide
(Figure 4). Second, in increasing from perhaps 280 ppm in
pre-industrial times to 380 ppm now, carbon dioxide should
already have produced 75 per cent of the theoretical warming of
~1°C that would be caused by a doubling to 560 ppm (Lindzen,
2006); as we move from 380 to 560 ppm, at most a trivial few
tenths of a degree of warming remain in the system. Claims of
greater warming, such as those of the IPCC (2001), are based
upon arbitrary adjustments to the lambda value in the
Stefan-Boltzmann equation, and untested assumptions about
positive feedbacks from water vapour. Third, the ice core data
show conclusively that, during natural climate cycling, changes
in temperature precede changes in carbon dioxide by an average
800 years or so (Fischer et al, 1999; Indermuhle et al, 2000;
Mudelsee, 2001; Caillon et al, 2003); similarly, temperature
change precedes carbon dioxide change, in this case by five
months, during annual seasonal cycling (Kuo, Lindberg and
Thomson, 1990). And, fourth, Boucot, Xu and Scotese (2004)
have shown that over the Phanerozoic little relationship exists
between the atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide and
necessary warming, including that extensive glaciation occurred
between 444 and 353 million years ago when atmospheric
carbon dioxide was up to 17 times higher than today (Chumakov,
2004).
In summary, there is almost universal agreement that significant
carbon dioxide increases – human-caused or otherwise – will
cause gentle planetary warming. But scientific opinion remains
strongly divided as to how great a warming would accompany a
real world doubling, and whether any such warming will on
balance be beneficial or harmful.
CAN COMPUTER MODELS PREDICT
FUTURE CLIMATE?
General circulation computer models (GCMs) are deterministic,
which is to say that they specify the climate system from the first
principles of physics. For many parts of the climate system, such
as the behaviour of turbulent fluids or the processes that occur
within clouds, our knowledge of the physics is incomplete, which
requires the extensive use of parameterisation (read ‘educated
guesses’) in the computer models. The modellers themselves
acknowledge that they are unable to predict future climate,
preferring the term ‘projection’ to describe the output of
their experiments which the IPCC then incorporates into
socioeconomic ‘scenarios’ (eg IPCC, 2001). This terminology
highlights the fact that GCMs are unvalidated and do not provide
skilled predictions of future climate out to 2100. Also, it
transpires, first, that none of the models was able to forecast the
path of the global average temperature statistic as it elapsed
between 1990 and 2006. And, second, GCMs persistently predict
that greenhouse warming trends should increase with altitude,
especially in the tropics, with the highest trends at around 10 km
height; in contrast, actual observations show the opposite, with
either flat or decreasing trends with increasing height in the
troposphere (CCSP, 2006).
Individual GCMs differ widely in their output under an
imposed regime of doubled carbon dioxide. The IPCC (2001,
Figure 5d) cites a range of 1.8 to 5.6°C warming by 2100 for the
model outputs that they favour, but this range can be varied
further to even include negative outputs (ie cooling) by minor
adjustment of some of the model parameters (Essex and
McKitrick, 2002). When climate modelling experiments produce
such cooling, the output is discarded as ‘obviously wrong’
(Stainforth et al, 2005).
A second use of GCM modelling is in climate attribution
studies, whereby the known 20th century meteorological record
is retrodicted using models fed with known or presumed
forcings, such as increasing carbon dioxide, volcanic eruptions
and other aerosols (eg Stott et al, 2001; Hulme et al, 2002,
Figure 4). After many years of trials, the IPCC (2001,
Figure 12.7) reported simulations that mimicked the historic
temperature record if and only if human emissions were included
in the forcings. These results have been widely misrepresented as
evidence for human-caused global warming. They are, of course,
evidence only that a curve matching exercise involving many
degrees of freedom has plausibly mimicked the 20th century
temperature curve. They are exercises in virtual reality, and not
evidence of any type.
64 Brisbane, QLD, 2 - 3 May 2007 The AusIMM New Leaders’ Conference
R M CARTER
FIG 4 - Incremental increase in forcing caused by addition of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere up to a value of 1200 ppm (inset: data plotted
with non-zeroed y-axis, to clarify incremental warming over the 200 - 500 ppm range). Note that an increase of 4.5 w/m2 equates to a
temperature increase of ~1°C. Note also the logarithmic relationship between increasing carbon dioxide and total downward radiation flux.
Forcing estimated using MODTRANS modelling (graphs courtesy W Eschenbach).
As an alternative to the deterministic GCM approach, there
exist several other types of computer model of empirical nature.
Such models use analysis of a portion of the climate record to
establish the pattern of past temperature change and then project
this pattern into the future. Papers include Kotov (2001;
application of chaos theory to last 50 000 years of Greenland ice
core data), Klyashtorin and Lyubushin (2003; analysis of last 150
year record of the global average temperature statistic), Loehle
(2004; analysis of last 5000 years of temperature record
contained in a Caribean deep sea core and a South African
speleothem) and Zhen-Shan and Xian (2007; analysis of Chinese
temperature record from 1881 - 2002). These papers yield almost
unanimous estimates of 21st century cooling rather than warming
(eg Figure 5). Unlike GCM scenarios, the results are consistent
with the observation that global average temperature peaked in
the El Nino year of 1998 and has remained static or slightly
declined since (cf Figure 6). In parallel studies rooted in solar
physics, projection of the cyclic historic pattern of sunspot
activity suggests that a forthcoming 21st century cooling will be
driven by falling solar activity, perhaps even to the level of the
cold Maunder minimum in the 17th century (Bashkirtsev and
Mashnich, 2003; Abdussamatov, 2006).
To summarise, empirical computer projections of 21st century
cooling are more consistent with the available data than the
greenhouse warming projected by GCMs. Though deterministic
GCMs are a valuable heuristic tool, they all rest upon the Kelvin
fallacy, ie the assumption that the physics of the system is fully
known. In essence, GCMs do not produce accurate climate
predictions and they are therefore unsuitable for direct use in
policy making (Khandekar, 2004).
IS THERE A CONSENSUS?
Argument based on consensus is not usual in science, for reasons
that have been summarised by writer Michael Crichton:
Let’s be clear: the work of science has nothing
whatever to do with consensus. Consensus is the
business of politics. Science, on the contrary,
requires only one investigator who happens to be
right, which means that he or she has results that
are verifiable by reference to the real world. In
science consensus is irrelevant. What is relevant
is reproducible results. The greatest scientists in
history are great precisely because they broke
with the consensus …
It would be hard to write a more accurate statement about the
way that science works than Crichton’s pithy summary. It can be
noted in support that we do not usually say that ‘there is a
consensus that the sun will rise tomorrow’. Instead, the confident
statement that ‘the sun will rise tomorrow’ rests on repeated
empirical testing and the understanding conferred by Copernican
and Newtonian theory. Therefore, statements such as ‘there is a
consensus that dangerous global warming will occur’ convey
sociological rather than scientific information. Individuals,
organisations and governments that espouse such views signal
mainly that they have a political agenda.
It needs to be stressed that the claimed ‘consensus’ advice to
policy makers provided by the IPCC is political, rather than
exclusively scientific as portrayed in the press. Complaints from
climate rationalists that the first, second and third IPCC reports
were subject to political manipulation centred on the over-egging
of the case for dangerous human-caused warming. Significantly,
the recent release of the Fourth Assessment Report (4AR; IPCC,
2007) was greeted by strong criticisms also from supporters of the
dangerous warming case; they allege that bureaucrats involved in
the preparation of 4AR removed statements by scientists that
highlighted climate risks, and that 4AR therefore understates the
risk of catastrophic warming. Thus David Wasdell (2007), an
IPCC reviewer, writes that he was ‘astounded at the alterations (to
the final scientific draft of the full 4AR report) that were imposed
by government agents during the final stage of review’. It
obviously matters not whether bureaucratic interference results in
exaggerating the climate change risks or minimising them; in
either case, and as is now agreed by both main sides to the global
warming dispute, the ‘consensus’ advice tendered to governments
by the IPCC is political and not scientific.
CAN WE MEASURE AVERAGE SURFACE
GLOBAL TEMPERATURE MEANINGFULLY?
Essex, McKitrick and Andresen (in press) have recently argued
that climate change cannot be summarised adequately by a
simple statistical average of temperatures from around the globe.
They assert that no average global temperature calculated for the
Earth (and many different averages are possible) can have any
physical meaning in the context of climate change, any more
than an average telephone number has any meaning for using the
telephone system. A temperature can be defined only for a
homogeneous system, which climate most definitely does not
represent. The processes which control climate, such as ocean
currents and atmospheric circulation, are driven by local and
regional temperature differences, not by a ‘global average
temperature’ statistic.
Let us ignore these arguments for a moment. Like the IPCC –
which has widely promulgated a global average temperature
curve based on surface thermometer readings since 1860 (IPCC,
2001, Figure 2) (Figure 6) – let us assume that the concept of an
The AusIMM New Leaders’ Conference Brisbane, QLD, 2 - 3 May 2007 65
THE MYTH OF DANGEROUS HUMAN-CAUSED CLIMATE CHANGE
FIG 5 - Instrumentally measured changes in global temperature for 1861 - 2000 (thin line), fitted with a cyclic modelled trend of period
64 years (bold line, with error bars for 2000 - 2030) (after Klyashtorin and Lyubushin, 2003, Figure 5). Projection of climatic cycling into
the 21st century indicates a predicted cooling trend.
average global surface temperature is meaningful and pose the
additional question: ‘is it possible to establish an accurate
estimate of its magnitude?’ As Dr Vincent Gray (personal
communication) and other climate rationalists have pointed out,
even if we accept the IPCC curve as a starting point for
discussion, its use as an accurate measure of climate change
faces five insuperable difficulties.
First, the temperature measurement sites are located
non-randomly, more than 90 per cent being on land despite about
70 per cent of the earth’s surface being represented by ocean.
Second, over time many of the measurement sites have
experienced changes in their surroundings that impact on local
temperature (eg new buildings, trees cut down or planted, ageing
paint on sun enclosures), introducing a warming bias into the
measurements; studies suggest that both urban heat island and
rural land-clearing effects have a material influence (Christy et
al, 2006; Pielke et al, in press; Ren et al, 2007). As one example,
1881 - 2004 temperature data from Europe reveal a warming rate
of 0.67°/century for urban meteorological stations as opposed to
0.37°/century for rural stations (Janssens, 2007). Third, the
number of measurement sites used varies dramatically through
time, starting in 1850 at 200 sites, building to more than 14 000
in 1965 and then declining to about 5000 by 2000 AD. Fourth,
the temperature at each site is constructed using the statistically
doubtful historic method of averaging the maximum and
minimum temperatures measured once each day at the site. Fifth,
and finally, the data used to construct the version of the global
surface temperature used by the IPCC is not released to the
public; the curve is therefore unreproduceable in the sense that it
cannot be checked independently (eg McIntyre, 2007; see also
Addendum).
One is forced to the conclusion that – despite their preeminence in the public debate, and despite the laborious
statistical analysis involved in compiling them – the historic
temperature records reconstructed from ground thermometer data
are of little value. Changes of less than 1°C/century displayed on
such curves may not exceed the true error bars of the average
temperature estimates. Therefore, the climate records that are of
most value for estimating 20th century climate change in true
context are those from high-quality proxies such as sediment
cores, ice cores or tree rings. Many such proxies show no
untoward warming at the end of the 20th century, and that they
usually represent local or regional rather than global climate
change is no reason to discount them.
IS GLOBAL AVERAGE TEMPERATURE
RISING OR FALLING?
There is no simple answer to this question. Despite the
uncertainties just discussed, the global surface thermometer
dataset and various high-quality geological proxy temperature
datasets are widely used as a basis for climate trend estimates.
For any such dataset, the answer to the apparently innocent
question posed in the heading depends entirely on the chosen
end-points of the data being considered. For instance, using the
Greenland ice core oxygen isotope data (proxy for local
temperature), warming has taken place since 16 000 years
ago, and also since 100 years ago (Davis and Bohling, 2001)
(Figure 7). Over intermediate time periods, however, cooling has
occurred since 10 000 and 2000 years ago, and temperature stasis
characterises both the last 700 years and (globally, from
meteorological records) the last eight years. Considering these
facts, is the temperature in Greenland warming or cooling?
Both the eight and 100 year-long intervals of temperature
change are too short to carry statistical significance regarding
long-term climate change. However, though the last 100 years of
temperature record has only limited climatic significance (for
instance, representing only three climate normal datapoints), it is
nonetheless important because it corresponds to the span of
instrumental meteorological records from the earth’s surface.
Accepting the 1860 - 2006 temperature record used by the IPCC
(2007; Climate Research Unit, University of East Anglia) as a
best measure, we find that there has been no significant increase
in surface global temperature since the peak El Nino year of
1998 (Figure 8). This result is confirmed by the two most reliable
records of average tropospheric temperature, drawn from
weather balloon radiosondes (since 1958) and satellite-mounted
microwave sounding units (MSU; since 1979). Of all these
datasets, the MSU record is accepted to be the most accurate and
globally representative. Once the effects of El Nino warmings
and volcanic coolings are allowed for, this record shows no
significant warming since its inception in 1979 (Gray, 2006)
(Figure 9). This conclusion is robust. Though several other
global temperature datasets exist, and though the MSU record
has been subject to repeated corrections in interpretation, none of
the available datasets document significant recent greenhouse
warming.
The global temperature stasis between 1998 and 2006
occurred despite continuing rises in atmospheric carbon dioxide
66 Brisbane, QLD, 2 - 3 May 2007 The AusIMM New Leaders’ Conference
R M CARTER
FIG 6 - Combined annual land surface-air and sea surface global temperature anomalies (°C) for 1861 - 2001 relative to a 1961 -
1990-average baseline, and plotted with the estimated two standard error uncertainty (after IPCC, 2001, Figure 2). Also plotted, without
error bars, is the estimated curve of atmospheric carbon dioxide values over the same period. Note the lack of correspondence between the
two curves, and especially that cooling accompanied the marked increase in carbon dioxide emissions between 1950 and 1970.
over that period. Consistent with this, Karner (2002) showed
from an analysis of global temperature series that:
… antipersistence in the lower tropospheric
temperature increments does not support the
science of global warming developed by IPCC.
Negative long-range correlation of increments
during the last 22 years means that negative
feedback has been dominating in the Earth
climate system during the period.
These facts, and the lack of a discernable human greenhouse
effect in late 20th century temperature records, are consistent
with Khilyuk and Chilingar’s (2006) estimate that the human
greenhouse forcing is four to five orders of magnitude less than
the major natural forcing agents.
In summary, the slope and magnitude of temperature trends
inferred from time-series data depend upon the choice of data
end points. Drawing trend lines through highly variable, cyclic
temperature data or proxy data is therefore a dubious exercise.
Accurate direct measurements of tropospheric global average
temperature have only been available since 1979, and they show
no evidence for greenhouse warming. Surface thermometer data,
though flawed, also show temperature stasis since 1998. This
pattern is not what is portrayed in the daily news media.
ARE TEMPERATURES CHANGING AT A
DANGEROUS RATE, OR HAVE THEY REACHED
A DANGEROUS LEVEL?
Fitting short-term trend lines through temperature or proxy
temperature data with no regard to underlying climate cycles is
meaningless, but this is widely ignored in the climate change
literature. Prestigious science academies and ad hoc expert
committees deliver reports that say (or imply), first, that
meaningful trends can be identified, and, second, that the rates
and magnitudes of temperature increase observed are ipso facto
unusual or dangerous.
The AusIMM New Leaders’ Conference Brisbane, QLD, 2 - 3 May 2007 67
THE MYTH OF DANGEROUS HUMAN-CAUSED CLIMATE CHANGE
FIG 7 - Climatic cycling over the last 16 000 years as indicated by averaged 20-year oxygen isotope ratios from the GISP2 Greenland ice
core (after NSIDC User Services, 1997 and Davis and Bohling, 2001). Trend lines A-E all extend up to the end of the 20th century, fitted
through the data for the last 16 000, 10 000, 2000, 700 and 100 years, respectively. The trends are indicative of both warming and cooling,
depending upon the chosen starting point, and all except E are statistically significant.
FIG 8 - Combined annual land surface-air and sea surface global
temperature anomalies (°C) for 1980 - 2005 relative to a 1961 -
1990-average baseline (data from Climate Research Unit,
University of East Anglia). Though a warming of perhaps 0.3°C is
recorded between 1980 and 1998 (a marked El Nino year), no
warming has occurred in the seven subsequent years despite
continued large increases in human-sourced atmospheric
carbon dioxide.
For example, the US Climate Change Science Program (CCSP,
2006), using all available instrumental data, reported late 20th
century rates of temperature increase of 1 - 2°C/century, and
IPCC (2007) estimated the overall magnitude of the temperature
increase over the last 100 years to be 0.74°C. However, both of
these estimates ignore the presence in all climate data of
decadal-centennial cyclicity (incidentally, they also ignore the
presence in their datasets of clear El Nino and volcanic eruption
signals of non-greenhouse origin). Meaningful comparative
judgements about climate change cannot be made on the basis of
the trivially-short, 150-year-long thermometer surface temperature
record, much less on the 27-year-long satellite tropospheric record.
To compare late 20th century warming with earlier geological
warm events requires the use of local proxy data, because no
global temperature statistics are available prior to the 20th
century. One of the best such datasets that extends over an
adequate period of time is the oxygen isotope record from the
Greenland ice core already referred to (Grootes et al, 1993;
Davis and Bohling, 2001). These data show a ~1500 year
warming-cooling cycle of 1 - 2°C magnitude. This cyclicity is
probably of solar origin (Bond et al, 2001; Singer and Avery,
2006), and the late 20th century warming period represents a
peak within it (Figure 10). Consistent with this, Solanki et al
(2004) have shown that the activity of the sun has been building
since the end of the Little Ice Age in the late 19th century, and
that over the last 60 years it has been at its strongest since the
early Holocene, c. 8000 ybp. In turn, Svensmark (2007, and other
papers) has identified a possible mechanism whereby solar
activity affects cosmic ray influx which in turn controls the cloud
formation that acts as one of the Earth’s main thermostats.
The Greenland ice core data also reveal typical rates of
temperature change of up to 2.5°C/century for periods of cooling
and warming of decadal to centennial time span (Figure 11).
In Greenland, then, the late 20th century warming proceeded
at unalarming rates to reach a peak that was probably cooler than
were the preceding Minoan, Mediaeval and Roman warm
periods. And at the other pole, in Antarctica, similar ice core
evidence shows that late 20th century temperature was up to 5°C
cooler than temperature highs associated with geologically
recent interglacial periods (Watanabe et al, 2003). Therefore, the
magnitude of the late 20th century warming, and its rate of
change, both fall well within known natural limits. In addition,
the late 20th century warming that is widely attributed to human
greenhouse emissions is of similar rate and magnitude to an
earlier natural warming between 1905 and 1940; in relationship
to which, it has been shown that the warmest decade of the last
1250 years in the European Alps was the 1940s rather than the
1990s (Buntgen et al, 2006).
The IPCC’s (2001, p 97) prescient diagnosis therefore remains
true today:
The fact that the global mean temperature has
increased since the late 19th century and that
other trends have been observed does not
necessarily mean that an anthropogenic effect on
the climate system has been identified. Climate
has always varied on all time-scales, so the
observed change may be natural. A more
detailed analysis is required to provide evidence
of a human impact.
IS THE IPCC A SCIENTIFIC OR POLITICAL
BODY? HOW GOOD IS ITS SCIENTIFIC ADVICE?
The body to which most governments turn for advice on climate
change is the IPCC. Formed in 1988 by the United Nations and
the World Meteorological Organization, the IPCC has now
issued three substantial statements, the First (1990), Second
(1995) and Third (2001) Assessment Reports, each of which
incorporates the research and opinions of many hundreds of
qualified scientists. The reports are detailed and compendious,
and each is therefore accompanied by a short chapter termed a
Summary for Policymakers (SPM) which is designed for
political application. Many distinguished scientists refuse to
participate in the IPCC process, and others have resigned from it,
because in the end the advice that the panel provides to
governments is political and not scientific (Gray, 2002; see also
summary at NZ Climate Science Coalition, 2005, Appendix B).
Despite the expenditure of at least $50 billion on climate
research since 1990, the science arguments for a dangerous
human influence on global warming have, if anything, become
weaker since the establishment of the IPCC. Yet the rhetoric of
alarm has been successively ramped up, from:
the observed (20th century temperature) increase
could be largely due to ... natural variability
(IPCC, 1990);
68 Brisbane, QLD, 2 - 3 May 2007 The AusIMM New Leaders’ Conference
R M CARTER
FIG 9 - Lower tropospheric temperature anomaly since 1979 as measured by satellite-mounted microwave sounding units (MSU; from
hhtp://vortex.nsstc.uah.edu/data/msu/t2lt/tltglhmam_5.2). When the warming effect of El Ninos, and the cooling effect of the El Chichon and
Pinatubo volcanic eruptions, are discounted, little if any greenhouse-forced warming is apparent for the last 25 years (Gray, 2006) Note also
that these tropospheric measurements agree with the ground-based thermometer series (Figure 8) in recording no significant warming since
1998, and probably none since 1982.
to the balance of the evidence suggests a
discernible human influence on climate (IPCC,
1995):
to there is new and stronger evidence that most
of the warming observed over the last 50 years is
attributable to human activities (IPCC, 2001);
to it is 90 per cent probable that the recent
warming is due to the observed increase in
anthropogenic greenhouse gas concentrations
(IPCC, 2007).
What can the evidence be for these increasingly dramatic
warnings?
The IPCC advances three main categories of argument for a
dangerous human influence on climate. The first is that over the
last 100 years global average temperature increased by about
0.74°C, which indeed it did if you accept (against the odds) that
the surface thermometer record used by the IPCC is accurate (cf
Figure 6). More reliably, historical records and many geological
data sets show that warming has indeed occurred since the
intense cold periods of the Little Ice Age in the 14th, 17th and
19th centuries (eg Lamb, 1977). The part of this temperature
recovery which occurred in the 20th century is the much famed
‘global warming’, alleged to have been caused by the
accumulation of human-sourced carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere. However, the high quality MSU satellite data
discussed earlier signal not only the absence of substantial
human-induced warming by recording similar temperatures in
1980 and 2006 (Figure 9), but also provide an empirical test of
the greenhouse hypothesis as understood by the public – a test
that the hypothesis fails.
The AusIMM New Leaders’ Conference Brisbane, QLD, 2 - 3 May 2007 69
THE MYTH OF DANGEROUS HUMAN-CAUSED CLIMATE CHANGE
FIG 10 - Oxygen isotope time series for the last 5000 years, GISP2 Greenland ice core (light line; same dataset as Figure 7), fitted with a
moving average (dark line; after a slide by Andre Illarianov, 2004). The Late 20th Century Warm Period represents the latest of a regular
millennial cycle of similar warm periods (grey stripes). The Late 20th Century Warm Period may have equalled the magnitude of the
Mediaeval Warm Period, but it has not yet attained the warmth of either of the preceding Roman or Minoan Warm Periods.
FIG 11 - Rate of temperature change for the last 48 000 years, in °C/century, based on the analysis of oxygen isotope ratios from the
GISP2 ice core (same dataset as Figure 7; after a slide by Andre Illarianov, 2004). Note that during the last 9000 years of the Holocene,
temperature change occurred regularly at rates between +2.5° and -2.5°C/century. Earlier, during the last glaciation, rates of change
as high as 15°C/century are indicated.
The second category of alarmist argument rests upon
circumstantial evidence. It is epitomised by Al Gore’s film ‘An
Inconvenient Truth’, which claims that human greenhouse
emissions are causing accelerated melting of icecaps, dangerous
increases in the rate of sea-level rise, increases in the frequency
and intensity of droughts or catastrophic storms, and enhanced
rates of biodiversity loss. Every such circumstantial argument
ignores two basic facts. The first is that all environmental
phenomena fluctuate in their rate, frequency or intensity as part
of the normal workings of our dynamic planet. The second,
which follows, is that whether a particular short-term change
over, say, the early 21st century has any human causation can
only be assessed when all the causes of natural environmental
change are fully understood. Many different fields of study are
involved and all are the subject of intensive ongoing research.
From this research emerges one implacable fact. It is that –
despite the weekly promulgation of new alarmist headlines in the
media – in no case yet has any climate-sensitive environmental
parameter been shown to be changing at a rate that exceeds its
historic natural rate of change, let alone in a way that can be
unequivocally associated with human causation. For example,
despite numerous attempts to link an increase in the intensity or
number of hurricanes to late 20th century warming, convincing
statistical evidence is absent (Kossin et al, 2007). Similarly, the
rates of sea-level rise now predicted by the IPCC (IPCC, 2007) is
consistent with the expected natural rates of rise that have been
documented from tide gauge records over the last 200 years
(IPCC, 2001). And similarly again, both the Greenland and
Antarctic ice sheets are close to mass balance (Zwally et al,
2005), and the interiors of both have cooled over recent decades.
The third line of IPCC argument, and the least convincing of
all, is the use of computer calculations to assess the likely future
course of climate. Many billions of dollars have been expended
by major climate research groups on honing complex GCMs of
the ocean and atmosphere. The models are a great intellectual
accomplishment, and their application helps us to understand
environmental and climatic change in many different ways.
However, none of these models has been validated, in the sense
of having passed successful prediction tests over the required
range of circumstances, and their accuracy is therefore unknown.
As Hendrik Tennekes remarked recently, ‘a (GCM) prediction
fifty or a hundred years into the future is an idle gesture’. That
the IPCC relies so heavily upon complex GCM-generated
scenarios as the basis for its climate alarmism is in point of fact
alarming in its own right; it also reflects the absence of any
strong empirical evidence for human-caused climate change, as
outlined earlier.
Special pleadings aside, therefore, the evidence for dangerous
human-caused global warming forced by human carbon dioxide
emissions is extremely weak. That the satellite temperature
record shows no substantial warming since 1978, and that even
the ground-based thermometer statistic records no warming since
1998, indicates that a key line of circumstantial evidence for
human-caused change (the parallel rise in the late 20th century of
both atmospheric carbon dioxide and surface temperature) is now
negated.
Against this background, in February this year the IPCC
released the SPM for its fourth (Science) Assessement Report.
The new summary (capriciously released two months before the
report to which it refers) does not ameliorate the IPCC’s rhetoric.
The summary also continues the regrettable practice of allocating
arbitrary numerical probability estimates to the causes and risks
of future damaging climate change (IPCC, 2005). In the present
state of knowledge, no scientist – IPCC acolyte or otherwise –
can justify the statement that:
most of the observed increase in globally
averaged temperature since the mid-20th century
is very likely (= 90 per cent probable) due to the
observed increase in anthropogenic greenhouse
gas concentrations (IPCC, 2007).
CONCLUSIONS
It is plain that the press have failed in their role as public
‘watchdog’ against the specious pleadings of contemporary
climate alarmists; indeed, the media itself is a self-interested
party to the debate (cf Carter, 2006a, b). And, returning to our
starting point, political leaders such as British Prime Minister
Tony Blair are misadvised both by this press bias and also
because they have mistakenly trusted the IPCC to provide
dispassionate scientific advice about global warming. In reality,
with the complete discrediting of the ‘hockey stick’ curve of
recent temperature change (McIntyre and McKitrick, 2003,
2005; Wegman, Scott and Said, 2006) that was the icon of their
report, the IPCC case for dangerous human-caused warming now
rests only on ambiguous anecdotal evidence, unvalidated
computer models and misleading attribution studies (IPCC,
2007). Appearing to concede this, and providing a truly
frightening insight into the ‘scientific’ attitudes of the
professional climate science research community, UK Tyndall
Centre Director, Professor Mike Hulme, wrote recently in The
Guardian (14 March, 2007) that:
Self-evidently dangerous climate change will not
emerge from a normal scientific process of truth
seeking, although science will gain some insights
into the question if it recognises the socially
contingent dimensions of a post-normal science.
But to proffer such insights, scientists – and
politicians – must trade (normal) truth for
influence. If scientists want to remain listened to,
to bear influence on policy, they must recognise
the social limits of their truth seeking and reveal
fully the values and beliefs they bring to their
scientific activity.
Climate change as a natural hazard is as much a geological as
it is a meteorological issue. It therefore needs to be managed in
the same way as other geohazards, ie by monitoring for the onset
of dangerous events and having in place an emergency response
plan to deal with any that eventuate. One meritorious example of
this is New Zealand’s geohazard network, termed GeoNet,
which provides civil defense authorities and the public with
accurate, evidence-based information regarding hazards such as
earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, tsunamis and floods. Though
climate change has so far not been included in GeoNet planning,
it differs from the hazards that are covered only in the extended
decadal time-scale over which a deleterious trend may occur;
GeoNet already deals with the short-term extreme weather events
that are associated with New Zealand’s mid-latitude, maritime
location. Climate response plans also need to be able to cope
with the type of sudden ‘climate’ events that are known both in
human (1816, the ‘year without a summer’; Harington, 1992)
and geological history (sharp warmings over a few years to
decades, followed by coolings, associated with 1470 year-period
Dansgaard-Oeschger events; eg Burns et al, 2003).
Those planning national climate policies must abandon the
alarmist IPCC view of climate change, and the illusory goal of
climate mitigation. Instead, plans are needed to identify when a
dangerous weather or climate event is imminent, or has started.
At the same time, research spending should be reallocated from
greenhouse and computer modelling studies and put towards the
study of natural climate rhymns and the development of
predictive tools for longer term climatic coolings and warmings.
Natural climate change being a real and undisputed hazard it is
certainly something that governments should prepare for, in the
same way that they plan for other natural disasters. Of the two
future climate possibilities, dangerous warming or dangerous
cooling, the evidence suggests that cooling will be the more
damaging; arguably, it is also the most imminent threat. First,
because there has been no measurable warming of global average
temperatures since 1998; second, because this lack of warming
coincides with empirical computer predictions for cooling and
70 Brisbane, QLD, 2 - 3 May 2007 The AusIMM New Leaders’ Conference
R M CARTER
evidence for decreasing solar activity in the first few decades of
the 21st century; and third because the current warm interglacial
period has already lasted 10 000 years and will inevitably be
followed by a glaciation.
Whether human activities have a measurable global influence
on natural climate trends has yet to be demonstrated. And,
depending upon the balance of the mechanisms (eg aerosols
versus greenhouse gases), the overall human effect could in the
end turn out to be one of either warming or cooling (cf IPCC,
2007, Figure SPM-2). That we don’t yet know which is, of
course, a reflection of the small size of the human signal and of
the fact that it is deeply buried in the noise of the natural climate
system. The current human-caused global warming hysteria –
promulgated by the media – is especially dangerous because it is
causing governments to neglect the much more real (though
long-term) dangers of natural climate change. Even worse, it is
causing profound damage to the use of science as an impartial
arbiter in public affairs.
This paper started with an alarmist quotation about global
warming from British Prime Minister Tony Blair. It seems
appropriate to end it, therefore, by recounting the advice that
President Vaclav Klaus of the Czech Republic recently (March,
2007) delivered to the US Congress Committee on Energy and
Commerce:
As someone who lived under communism for
most of my life I feel obliged to say that the
biggest threat to freedom, democracy, the market
economy and prosperity at the beginning of the
21st century is not communism or its various
softer variants. Communism (has been) replaced
by the threat of ambitious environmentalism …
The environmentalists consider their ideas and
arguments to be an undisputable truth and use
sophisticated methods of media manipulation and
PR campaigns to exert pressure on policymakers
to achieve their goals. Their argumentation is
based on the spreading of fear and panic by
declaring the future of the world to be under
serious threat. In such an atmosphere they
continue pushing policymakers to adopt illiberal
measures, impose arbitrary limits, regulations,
prohibitions, and restrictions on everyday human
activities and make people subject to omnipotent
bureaucratic decision-making … Man-made
climate change has become one of the most
dangerous arguments aimed at distorting human
efforts and public policies in the whole world.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I thank Dr Basil Beamish and Dr Gerrit van der Lingen for
providing constructive critical comments on the draft of this
paper, Willis Eschenbach for providing the graphs for Figure 4,
and the Australian Research Council for financial support under
grant DP 0344080. It is also appropriate that I acknowledge the
many colleagues who participate in the email chat groups
Climate Sceptics (moderated for many years by Timo
Hameranta, and now by David Wojick) and New Zealand
Climate Science Coalition (moderated by Terry Dunleavy). Chat
group members are too numerous to name individually, but I
thank them all for the questing, critical and informative nature of
their postings on many diverse topics, for it has greatly expanded
my knowledge and understanding of the vexed issue of global
climate change.
RECOMMENDED WEB SITE LINKS
The following URLs contain much useful discussion and many
additional references on the pros and cons of human-caused
global warming. Peer-reviewed literature on global warming has
for many years been subject to a stifling conformity, whereby
views that differ from the IPCC alarmist consensus are
suppressed or otherwise discounted. Achieving a balanced view
on climate change therefore demands that an interested party
seek out the sort of informed but informal discussion that can be
found amongst the following links.
• Author’s biography:
http://members.iinet.net.au/~glrmc/index.htm
• Tom Nelson, critical analysis of the CO2 warming issue:
brneurosci.org/co2.html
• Roger Pielke’s blog on climate issues:
climatesci.colorado.edu
• US Senator James Inhofe, climate issues:
epw.senate.gov/public/index.cfm?FuseAction=Minority.Blogs
• John McLean, analysis and links on climate change:
mclean.ch/climate/global_warming.htm
• Bob Carter, analysis and links on climate change:
members.iinet.net.au/~glrmc/new_page_1.htm
• Francis Massen, news, analysis and links on climate change:
meteo.lcd.lu
• Steve McIntyre, critical analysis of the statistical basis of
climate change issues: www.climateaudit.org
• NZ Climate Science Coalition, useful links and documents
on climate change: www.climatescience.org.nz
• Analysis and comment on climate-related issues:
www.co2andclimate.org/climate
• Sherwood and Keith Idso, critical comment on climaterelated issues, especially CO2: www.co2science.org
• Cooler Heads Coalition, thorough coverage of climate news:
www.globalwarming.org/index.php
• Peter Glover, analysis and links on climate change:
www.globalwarminghysteria.com
• A US-based international group of climate experts with
special strength in meteorology: www.icecap.us
• John Daly (dec), considered contrarian viewpoints on climate
change: www.john-daly.com
• Lavoisier Group, discussion and useful links on greenhouse
issues: www.lavoisier.com.au
• National Resources Stewardship Project, links on climate
change issues: www.nrsp.com/news.html
• PAGES, up-to-date data on ancient climate change:
www.pages.unibe.ch/cgi-bin/WebObjects/products.woa
• Ross McKitrick, critical analysis of the ‘hockey-stick’ graph:
www.uoguelph.ca/~rmckitri/research/trc.html
• Warwick Hughes, critical analysis of IPCC and other climate
change science: www.warwickhughes.com
• Doug Hoyt, critical analyses of climate change science:
www.warwickhughes.com/hoyt/climate-change.htm
• Pat Michaels blog on climate issues:
http://www.worldclimatereport.com
REFERENCES
Abdussamatov, H I, 2004. On long-term variations of the total irradiance
and decrease of global temperature of the Earth after a miximum of
xxiv cycle of activity and irradiance, Bulletin of Crimea Observatory,
103:122-127.
Bashkirtsev, V S and Mashnich, G P, 2003. Will we face global warming
in the nearest future? Geomagnetism i Aeronomia, 43:124-127.
Beck, E-G, 2007. 180 years of CO2 gas analysis by chemical methods,
Energy and Environment: in review.
The AusIMM New Leaders’ Conference Brisbane, QLD, 2 - 3 May 2007 71
THE MYTH OF DANGEROUS HUMAN-CAUSED CLIMATE CHANGE
Bond, G, Kromer, B, Beer, J, Muscheler, R, Evans, M N, Showers, W,
Hoffmann, S, Lotti-Bond, R, Hajdas, I and Bonani, G, 2001.
Persistent solar influence on North Atlantic climate during the
Holocene, Science, 294:2130-2136.
Boucot, A J, Xu, C and Scotese, C R, 2004. Phanerozoic climate zones
and paleogeography with consideration of atmospheric CO2 levels,
Paleontologicheskiy Zhurnal, 2:3-11.
Buntgen, U, Frank, D C, Nievergelt, D and Esper, J, 2006. Summer
temperature variations in the European Alps, AD 755 - 2004, Journal
of Climate, 19:5606-5623.
Burns, S J, Fleitmann, D, Matter, A, Kramers, J and Al-Subbary, A A,
2003. Indian Ocean climate and an absolute chronology over
Dansgaard/Oeschger Events 9 to 13, Science, 301:1365-1367.
Caillon, N, Severinghaus, J P, Jouzel, J, Barnola, J M, Kang, J and
Lipenkov, V Y, 2003. Timing of atmospheric CO2 and Antarctic
temperature changes across Termination III, Science, 299:1728-1731.
Carter, R M, 2006a. Public misperceptions of human-caused climate
change: The role of the media, Testimony before the US Senate
Committee on Environment and Public Works, December 6, 2006
[online]. Available from: <http://members.iinet.net.au/~glrmc/new_
page_1.htm>.
Carter, R M, 2006b. Human-caused global warming. McCarthyism,
intimidation, press bias, censorship, policy-advice corruption and
propaganda, Tabled paper before the US Senate Committee on
Environment and Public Works, 6 December 2006 [online]. Available
from: <http://members.iinet.net.au/~glrmc/new_page_1.htm>.
Carter, R M, de Freitas, C R, Goklany, I M, Holland, D and Lindzen, R S,
2006. The Stern Review: A dual critique, Part I: The Science, World
Economics, 7:167-198.
CCSP, 2006. Temperature Trends in the Lower Atmosphere: Steps for
Understanding and Reconciling Differences (ed: T R Karl, S J
Hassol, C D Miller and W L Murray), A Report by the Climate
Change Science Program and the Subcommittee on Global Change
Research, Washington, DC.
Christy, J R, Norris, W B, Redmond, K and Gallo, K P, 2006.
Methodology and results of calculating central California surface
temperature trends: Evidence of human-induced climate change?
Journal of Climate, 19:548-563.
Chumakov, N M, 2004. Trends in global climate changes inferred from
geological data, Stratigraphy and Geological Correlation,
12:117-138.
Davis, J C and Bohling, G C, 2001. The search for patterns in ice-core
temperature curves, in Geological Perspectives of Global Climate
Change (ed: L C Gerhard et al), American Association of Petroleum
Geologists, Studies in Geology, 47:213-229.
de Freitas, C R, 2002. Are observed changes in the concentration of
carbon dioxide in the atmosphere really dangerous? Bulletin of
Canadian Petroleum Geology, 50:297-327.
Ditlevsen, P, 2007. Climate Change: Could It Be Random? [online].
Available from: <http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2007/03/
070309103123.htm>.
Eamus, D, 1996. Responses of field grown trees to CO2 enrichment,
Commonwealth Forestry Review, 75:39-47.
Essex, C and McKitrick, R, 2002. Taken by Storm. The Troubled Science,
Policy and Politics of Global Warming, Key Porter paperback.
Essex, C, McKitrick, R and Andresen, B, in press. Does a global
temperature exist? Journal of Non-Equilibrium Thermodynamics.
Fischer, H, Wahlen, M, Smith, J, Mastroianni, D and Deck, B, 1999. Ice
core records of atmospheric CO2 in the past two centuries, Science,
283:1712-1714.
GeoNet, 2006. The GeoNet Project. Monitoring geological hazards in
New Zealand [online]. Available from: <http://www.geonet.org.nz/>.
Gerhard, L E, Harrison, W E and Hanson, B M, 2001. Geological
perspectives on climate change, American Association of Petroleum
Geologists, Studies in Geology, 47:1-372.
Gray, V, 2002. The Greenhouse Delusion. A critique of ‘Climate Change
2001’, 95 p (Multi-Science Publishing Co Ltd: Essex).
Gray, V, 2006. Temperature trends in the lower atmosphere, Energy and
Environment, 17:707-714.
Gray, W M, 2006. Hurricanes and climate change: Assessing the linkages
following the 2006 season, Submission to US Senate Committee on
Public Works and Environment, 11 October 2006 [online]. Available
from: <http://www.marshall.org/article.php?id=465>.
Grootes, P M, Stuiver, M, White, J W C, Johnsen, S and Jouzel, J, 1993.
Comparison of oxygen isotope records from the GISP2 and GRIP
Greenland ice cores, Nature, 366:552-554.
Harington, C R (ed), 1992. The Year Without a Summer? World Climate
in 1816, 576 p (Canadian Museum of Nature: Ottawa).
Hulme, M, Jenkins, G J, Lu, X, Turnpenny, J R, Mitchell, T D, Jones, R
G, Lowe, J, Murphy, J M, Hassell, D, Boorman, P, McDonald, R and
Hill, S, 2002. Climate Change Scenarios for the United Kingdom:
The UKCIP02 Scientific Report, 120 p, Tyndall Centre for Climate
Change Research, School of Environmental Sciences, University of
East Anglia, Norwich, UK.
Hurd, B, 2006. Analyses of CO2 and other atmospheric gases,
Australasian Insitute of Geologists, News, 86:10-11.
Idso, S B, 2001. Carbon-dioxide-induced global warming: A skeptic’s
view of potential climate change, in Geological Perspectives on
Climate Change (eds: L E Gerhard et al), American Association of
Petroleum Geologists, Studies in Geology, 47:317-336.
Indermuhle, A, Monnin, E, Stauffer, B and Stocker, T F, 2000.
Atmospheric CO2 concentration from 60 to 20 kyr BP from the
Taylor Dome ice core, Antarctica, Geophysical Research Letters,
27:735-738.
IPCC, 1990. Climate Change – The IPCC Scientific Assessment,
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Working Group 3, first
assessment report (ed: J T Houghton et al) (Cambridge University
Press: Cambridge).
IPCC, 1995. Climate Change, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change, Working Group 3, second assessment report (ed: J T
Houghton et al) (Cambridge University Press: Cambridge).
IPCC, 2001. Climate Change 2001: The Scientific Basis,
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Working Group 3, third
assessment report (ed: J T Houghton et al), 881 p (Cambridge
University Press: Cambridge).
IPCC, 2005. Guidance notes for lead authors of the IPCC fourth
assessment report on addressing uncertainties [online]. Available
from: http://www.ipcc.ch/activity/uncertaintyguidancenote.pdf
IPCC, 2007. Climate Change: The Physical Science Basis. Summary for
Policymakers, Intergovernmental Panel on Climatic Change, fourth
assessment report, Geneva, Switzerland.
Janssens, J, 2007. Climate evolution in Europe (1881 - 2004) [online].
Available from: <http://members.chello.be/j.janssens/Engaarde.html#
Europe>.
Jaworowski, Z, 2007. CO2: The greatest scientific scandal of our time,
Executive Intelligence Review, 34(11):38-53.
Jones, P D, Groisman, P Y, Coughlan, M, Plummer, N, Wang, W C and
Karl, T R, 1990. Assessment of urdanization effects in time series of
surface air temperature over land, Nature, 347:169-172.
Karner, O, 2002. On non-stationarity and anti-persistency in global
temperature series, Journal of Geophysical Research, 107:D20.
Khandekar, M L, 2004. Are climate model projections reliable enough for
climate policy? Energy and Environment, 15:521-525.
Khandekar, M L, Murty, T S and Chittibabu, P, 2005. The global warming
debate: A review of the state of science, Pure and Applied
Geophysics, 162:1557-1586.
Khilyuk, L F and Chilingar, G V, 2006. On global forces of nature driving
the Earth’s climate. Are humans involved? Environmental Geology,
50:899-910.
Kininmonth, W, 2004. Climate Change: A Natural Hazard
(Multi-Science Publishing: Essex).
Klyashtorin, L B and Lyubushin, A A, 2003. On the coherence between
dynamics of the world fuel consumption and global temperature
anomaly, Energy and Environment, 14:733-782.
Kossin, J P, Knapp, K R, Vimont, D J, Murnane, R J and Harper, B A,
2007. A globally consistent reanalysis of hurricane variability and
trends, Geophysical Research Letters, 34:L4815, doi:
10.1029/2006GLO028836.
Kotov, S R, 2001. Near-term climate prediction using ice-core data from
Greenland, in Geological Perspectives of Global Climate Change
(eds: L C Gerhard et al), American Association of Petroleum
Geologists, Studies in Geology, 47:305-315.
Kouwenberg, L, Wagner, R, Kurschner, W and Visscher H, 2005.
Atmospheric CO2 fluctuations during the last millenium
reconstructed by stomatal frequency analysis of Tsuga heterophylla
needles, Geology, 33:33-36.
72 Brisbane, QLD, 2 - 3 May 2007 The AusIMM New Leaders’ Conference
R M CARTER
Kuo, C, Lindberg, C and Thomson, D J, 1990. Coherence established
between atmospheric carbon dioxide and global temperature, Nature,
343:709-713.
Kurschner, W M, van der Burgh, J, Visscher, H and Dilcher, D L, 1996.
Oak leaves as biosensors of late Neogene and early Pleistocene
paleoatmospheric CO2 concentrations, Marine Micropalaeontology,
27:299-312.
Lamb, H H, 1977. Climate: Present, Past and Future, vol 2, 835 p
(Methuen: London).
Lindzen, R, 2006. Understanding common climate claims, in Proceedings
International Seminar on Nuclear War and Planetary Emergencies
(World Federation of Scientists), Preprint available from: <http:
//www.climatescience.org.nz/assets/20060507_O_Lindzen.pdf>.
Loehle, C, 2004. Climate change: detection and attribution of trends from
long-term geologic data, Ecological Modelling, 171:433-450.
Lowenstein, T K and Demicco, R V, 2006. Elevated Eocene atmospheric
CO2 and its subsequent decline, Science, 313:1928.
McIntyre, S, 2007. Jones and the Russian UHI [online]. Available from:
<http://www.climateaudit.org/?p=664>.
McIntyre, S and McKitrick, R, 2003. Corrections to the Mann et al
(1998) proxy database and northern hemispheric average temperature
series, Energy and Environment, 14:751-771.
McIntyre, S and McKitrick, R, 2005. Hockey sticks, principal
components, and spurious significance, Geophysical Research
Letters 32:doi 10.1029/2004GL021750, 5 p.
Mudelsee, M, 2001. The phase relations among atmospheric CO2 content,
temperature and global ice volume over the past 420 ka, Quaternary
Science Reviews 20:583-589.
New Zealand Climate Science Coalition, 2006. Response of the New
Zealand Climate Science Coalition to comments by Dr David Wratt.
Attachment B: Inadequacies and criticisms of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change [online]. Available from: <http://www.
climatescience.org.nz/assets/2006930201100.ResponseToRSNZ.pdf>.
NSIDC User Services, 1997. The Greenland Summit Ice Cores,
CD-ROM, GISP-2/GRIP, World Data Center A for Glaciology,
CIRES, University of Colorado, Boulder.
Petit, J R, Jouzel, J, Raynaud, D, Barkov, N I, Barnola, J-M, Basile, I,
Bender, M, Chappellaz, J, Davis, M, Delaygue, G, Delmotte, M,
Kotlyakov, V M, Legrand, M, Lipenkov, V Y, Lorius, C, PÉpin, L,
Ritz, C, Saltzman, E and Stievenard, M, 1999. Climate and
atmospheric history of the past 420 000 years from the Vostok ice
core, Antarctica, Nature, 399:429-436.
Philander, S G, 1998. Is the Temperature Rising - The Uncertain Science
of Global Warming, 262 p (Princeton University Press).
Pielke, R A, Davey, C, Niyogi, D, Fall, S, Steinweg-Woods, J, Hubbard,
K, Lin, X, Cai, M, Lim, Y-K, Li, H, Nielsen-Gammon, J, Gallo, K,
Hale, R, Angel, J, Mahmood, R, Foster, S, Boyles, R, McNider, R T
and Blanken, P, in press. Unresolved issues with the assessment of
multi-decadal global land surface temperature trends, Journal of
Geophysical Research.
Ren, G Y, Chu, Z Y, Chen, Z H and Ren, Y Y, 2007. Implications of
temporal change in urban heat island intensity observed at Beijing
and Wuhan stations, Geophysical Research Letters, 34:L05711,
doi:10.1029/2006GL027927.
Robinson, A R, Baliunas, S L, Soon, W and Robinson, Z W, 1998.
Environmental effects of increased atmospheric carbon dioxide
[online]. Available from: <http://www.oism.org/pproject/s33p36.htm>.
Ruddiman, W F, 2001. Earth’s Climate, Past and Future, 465 p (Freeman
and Company: New York).
Saxe, H, Ellsworth, D S and Heath, J, 1998. Tree and forest functioning
in an enriched CO2 atmosphere, New Phytologist, 139:395-436.
Singer, F S and Avery, T A, 2006. Unstoppable Global Warming: Every
1,500 Years, 276 p (Rowman & Littlefield Publishers).
Solanki, S K, Usoskin, I G, Kromer, B, Schussler, M and Beer, J, 2004.
Unusual activity of the Sun during recent decades compared to the
previous 11,000 years, Nature, 431:1084-1087.
Stainforth, D A, Aina, T, Christensen, C, Collins, M, Faull, N, Frame, D
J, Kettleborough, J A, Knight, S, Martin, A, Murphy, J M, Piani, C,
Sexton, D, Smith, L A, Spicer, R A, Thorpe, A J and Allen, M R,
2005. Uncertainty in predictions of the climate response to rising
levels of greenhouse gases, Nature, 433:403-406.
Stott, P A, Tett, S F B, Jones, G S, Allen, M R, Ingram, W J and Mitchell,
J F B, 2001. Attribution of twentieth century temperature change to
natural and anthropogenic causes, Journal of Climate, 13:513-537.
Svensmark, H, 2007. Cosmoclimatology: A new theory emerges,
Astronomy and Geophysics, 48:1-18.
Wagner, T, Aaby, B and Visscher, H, 2002. Rapid atmospheric CO2
changes associated with the 8,200-years-BP cooling event,
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 99:12011-12014.
Wasdell, D, 2007. Political corruption of the IPPC Report? [online].
Available from: <http://www.meridian.org.uk/Resources/Global%20
Dynamics/IPCC/index.htm>.
Watanabe, O, Jouzel, J, Johnsen, S, Parrenin, F, Shoji, H and Yoshida, N,
2003. Homogeneous climate variability across East Antarctica over
the past three glacial cycles, Nature, 422:509-512.
Wegman, E J, Scott, D W and Said, Y H, 2006. Ad hoc committee report
on the ‘Hockey Stick’ global climate reconstruction [online].
Available from: <http://republicans.energycommerce.house.gov/108/
home/07142006_Wegman_Report.pdf>.
Zhen-Shan, L and Xian, S, 2007. Multi-scale analysis of global
temperature changes and trends of a drop in temperature in the next
20 years, Meteorology and Atmospheric Physics, 95:115-121.
Zwally, H J, Giovinetto, M B, Li, J, Cornejo, H G, Beckley, M A,
Brenner, A C, Saba, J L and Yi, D, 2005. Mass changes of the
Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets and shelves and contributions to
sea-level rise, Journal of Glaciology, 51:509-527.
ADDENDUM
US Supreme Court Decision
On 2 April, the US Supreme Court handed down its decision on
the case between the State of Massachusetts and the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). By a narrow five to
four decision, the court ruled that the EPA must consider
greenhouse gases as pollutants, saying:
Because greenhouse gases fit well within the
Clean Air Act’s capacious definition of ‘air
pollutant’ we hold that EPA has the statutory
authority to regulate the emission of such gases
from new motor vehicles.
The Court also said that the:
harms associated with climate change are
serious and well-recognized and that EPA has
offered no reasoned explanation for its refusal to
decide whether greenhouse gases cause or
contribute to climate change.
Predictably, the decision was greeted with approval by
environmental groups, and with dismay by those who question
whether any court has the competence to determine a scientific,
rather than a legal, matter. In a dissenting statement, Chief
Justice John Roberts said the court lacked constitutional power to
second-guess the EPA at the behest of states and environmental
groups, adding that the majority’s reasoning:
has caused us to transgress the proper – and
properly limited – role of the courts in a
democratic society.
Justice Antonin Scalia, dissenting also, said the court:
has no business substituting its own desired
outcome for the reasoned judgment of the
responsible agency.
Refer to http://www.supremecourtus.gov/opinions/06pdf/05-11
20.pdf for further information.
Release of data by the Climate Research Unit
Canadian Steven McIntyre is one of several persons who have
requested temperature data from the Climate Research Unit at
the University of East Anglia, and in particular the data used in a
classic study of the urban heat island effect by Jones et al (1990).
The AusIMM New Leaders’ Conference Brisbane, QLD, 2 - 3 May 2007 73
THE MYTH OF DANGEROUS HUMAN-CAUSED CLIMATE CHANGE
This request, like other similar requests, was initially refused.
After appealing the decision, McIntyre recently received a letter
from the Information Policy Officer at the University of East
Anglia stating that the data and metadata that can still be
identified for this study will be posted for public access on the
University’s web site no later than 13 April 2007.
Noting the success of McIntyre’s statistical challenges to the
validity of the Mann et al, hockey stick curve, his re-analysis of
the Jones et al (1990) urban heat island dataset will be of great
public interest.
Refer to http://www.climateaudit.org/?p=1323#more-1323 for
further information