Discovery: Increased Ocean
Evaporation Mitigates Ocean Rise
Due to Melting Glaciers
D. White CH. E.
Climate Change Truth Inc.
A nonprofit research corporation
cctruth.org
3313 W Cherry Lane
Suite 1040
Meridian ID 83642
Abstract
In January 2017 a Global and Regional Sea
Level Rise Scenarios for the United States
paper was published [1]. It speculated four
scenarios of ocean level rise. In this report, I
show the correct ocean rise data to determine
which scenario is most correct. The current
earth warming had started in the 1970s. Ocean
evaporation is a flux from ocean to air. It has
been described mathematically many times. In
this report I will show that increased evaporation
from warming oceans and dilution of salt content
is offsetting most, if not all, of ocean rise due to
melting glaciers. The main part of Glaciers that
is melting is the ice under water. Water expands
when frozen and contracts when melting. This
action lowers the ocean level. I worked with the
NOAA Satellite Altimetry group to make graphs
every 10 degrees latitude. They clearly show no
increase of ocean rise since 1880, when ocean
measurements began to be taken.
Keywords
Ocean rise, ocean evaporation, sea level rise
Method
I contacted Dr. Laury Miller, Chief of NOAA's
Laboratory for Satellite Altimetry in Washington,
to make graphs by every 10 degrees for ocean
rise. We also installed NOAA RADS software to
make the graphs [2]. The NOAA group provided
direction for making a script to create the graphs
in this report.
Results & Discussion
Since 1880, over a period of one hundred thirtyseven years, we have had a global sea rise of
354 mm, a rate of 2.6 mm per year. The global
satellite measurement data since 1993 match
the previous data and show a 2.5 mm/year
increase. Ocean rises in the northern latitudes
are increasing in rate while those in the southern
latitudes are increasing at a slower rate.
Additionally, "latent heat of evaporation" cools
the oceans down.
Figure 1. Global ocean rise since 1880, 2.6
mm/year
Ice from icebergs, which are melting actually
lower the ocean rise because water expands
when it is frozen, and contracts during melting.
The graphs I made are by latitude from north to
south latitudes. I know this combined both the
Atlantic, Pacific and other sea’s data in each
graph. However, I am mostly interested in a
trend by latitude. This is just as valid as the
global graph as in Figure 1. The first graph,
Figure 1, is for the entire ocean rise set. This
data is the familiar ocean graph from NOAA. [3].
The ocean rise is 2.6 mm/year historically.
Figure 2 is global ocean data from Satellite
Altimetry. Figures 3 through 13 are every 10 °
latitude ocean rise measurement graphs. This
data clearly shows no increase of ocean rise
2
worldwide due to melting glaciers from a
warming earth. Oceans in the northern latitudes
are rising slightly due to a thermal expansion in
the northern hemisphere. Oceans in the
southern hemisphere are rising at a slower rate
due to thermal contraction. The only thing that
can keep the oceans from rising faster is
increased evaporation from two causes. First,
we have warmer oceans from a warmer earth.
Second, we have diluted salt concentration from
melting glaciers, which also increases
evaporation. Clausius-Clapeyron Equation,
which defines the slope of the vapor pressure
curve, describes ocean evaporation. The rate of
water vapor pressure change by temperature is
defined by the heat of vaporization divided by
the flux. The flux is the temperature times the
quantity of Vg-Vf . Water vapor concentration
varies from trace amounts in polar regions to
nearly four percent in the tropics [4]. As the
troposphere temperature increases, the vapor
pressure of water in the atmosphere decreases
and the ocean evaporation increases until
equilibrium. Therefore, the increased
evaporation is offsetting all ocean rise due to
melting glaciers. The troposphere is only 4%
clouds and has a great amount of increased
evaporation capability especially with warming.
The troposphere is a transport mechanism for
ocean evaporation to land.
Figure 2. Global ocean rise 2.5 mm/year
Figure 3. 60° north ocean rise 3.2 mm/year
Figure 4. 50° north ocean rise 3.2 mm/year
Figure 5. 40° north ocean rise 2.8 mm/year
Figure 6. 30° north ocean rise 2.8 mm/year
3
Figure 7. 20° north ocean rise 2.4 mm/year
Figure 8. 10° north ocean rise 2.8 mm/year
Figure 9. 10° south ocean rise 2.4 mm/year
Figure 10. 20° south ocean rise 2.4 mm/year
Figure 10. 30° south ocean rise 2.4 mm/year
Figure 11. 40° south ocean rise 2.4 mm/year
Figure 12. 50° south ocean rise 2.0 mm/year
4
Figure 13. 60° south ocean rise 2.0 mm/year
Figure 14. Summary graph of RADS data with
GHCNM data
Model for ocean level drivers.
We have had forty years of heating in the world
and glaciers are melting. The ocean rise rate is
lower in the south where the glaciers are melting
at a rate which is 1/3 of the artic glaciers from
GRACE data (5).
 Model:
1. Increased water temperature:
Increased evaporation from warmer
water.
2. Increased air temperature: increased
ocean evaporation from diffusion flux.
3. Increased melting of ice in the water
lowers the sea level. Also Changes the
salt concentration which increases
evaporation.
Conclusion
In one hundred years the oceans will rise 260
mm. Even at the 3.2 mm rate, the rise would be
0.32 meters. Increased evaporation is offsetting
the ocean rise due to melting glaciers.
Increased evaporation also cools the oceans
down. The scenario from the Global Ocean
Rise paper that shows the lowest increase in
ocean rise is the correct scenario. We will make
a script to keep these graphs up to date on our
site at cctruth.org. I will monitor the ocean level
graphs each year. The correct statistics to put
on a global ocean rise graph are 2.7mm/yr +/-
0.6 mm
References
1. NOAA Technical Report NOS CO-OPS
083 Global and Regional Sea Level
Rise Scenarios for the United States.
William V. Sweet et al.
https://tidesandcurrents.noaa.gov/public
ations/techrpt83_Global_and_Regional_
SLR_Scenarios_for_the_US_final.pdf
2. Altimetry data are provided by the
NOAA Laboratory for Satellite Altimetry.
3. https://www.epa.gov/climateindicators/climate-change-indicatorssea-level.
4. https://web.physics.ucsb.edu/~lgrace/ch
em123/troposphere.htm
5
5. https://climate.nasa.gov/vital-signs/icesheets/
Conflict of Interest section:
I have no known conflict of interest in the
production of this paper. 