Hurricane Math

 
Air doesn't hold enough heat to have the slightest effect upon oceans.

If all 1°C atmospheric heating said to be caused by humans went into the oceans, the increase in ocean temperature would be 0.001°C, and none would be left in the air.
 

1°C atmosphere	= 0.001°C ocean heat
 	or = 0.037°C top 100 m (2.7%) of oceans

 
depth of ocean
 

 
Scientists keep saying that hurricanes are not caused by global warming. Some non-scientists keep saying they are. The promoters of causes don't let scientists get in their way.

The fact that there have been few hurricanes over the past twenty years shows the truth. On top of that, simple math shows why. The atmosphere would have to lose 55°C to heat the top 100 meters of the ocean 2°C. At least a 2°C temperature increase on the surface of the oceans would be needed to increase hurricanes significantly.

This is because air has very low heat capacity. It means the heat gets sucked out of air without doing much to the water it enters. Melting Arctic ice with air is even more ridiculous, as melting ice requires 80 times as much heat as warming water 1°C requires on a gram for gram basis.

Calculations

The total mass of the oceans is 262 times the mass of the atmosphere. A gram of sea water has 3.84 times as much heat capacity as a gram of the atmosphere. Combined, it takes 1006 times as much heat to raise the temperature of the oceans 1°C as to increase atmospheric temperature 1°C.

So, if the air temperature has increased 1°C, as claimed, that amount of heat could only increase ocean temperatures by 0.001°C. Even the top 100 meters of the ocean (2.7%) would only be 0.037°C warmer, if all atmospheric heating said to be caused by global warming went into it.

Melting ice takes 80 times as much heat as raising water temperature 1°C. Which means claimed global warming does not have the slightest ability to melt ice.

Fake Claims

Recently, a claim was made stating that much of the heating of global warming goes into the oceans. At first, the claim was 50% goes into the oceans, and then 90%. Climatologists are not allowed to say that. The oceans were supposedly taken into account in 1998, when the definitive equation was derived for calculating global warming based on fake radiative transfer equations. Nothing can change afterwards without discarding all previous science on the subject. The rationalizations of climatologists are not how science works.

Furthermore, There is no way to get the heat of the atmosphere into the oceans without removing it from the atmosphere. Radiation won't do it. The heat has to be in the atmosphere before it can be radiated. The radiative transfer equations say doubling the amount of CO2 in the air will create 3.7 watts per square meter of radiation, which will heat the near surface of the earth by 1°C.

Definition Of Heat

A calorie of heat will increase the temperature of a gram of water by one degree centigrade. Temperature depends upon mass. Doubling the mass with the same amount of heat reduces the temperature in half.

calories = grams x °C        °C = calories / gram

The Calculations

If all 1°C (not correct, because CO2 has not doubled yet) heating of the atmosphere said to be caused by global warming went into the surface of the oceans to a depth of 100 meters, the ocean surface temperature increase would be 0.037°C, and none of the heating would be left in the air. Ice would be even less influenced. It would take 100 times that much temperature increase in the ocean surface to influence hurricanes.

It means global warming does not have the slightest ability to warm the oceans, melt Arctic ice, create hurricanes or cause ocean levels to rise. Whatever is happening, it is not caused by greenhouse gases creating global warming.

Ocean Surface = 361 x 106 km2

Depth = 0.1 kilometer = 361 x 105 km3 = 361 x 1014 m3

Seawater Density = 1025 kg/m3

     x 361 x 1014 m3 = 3.7 x 1019 kg

Specific Heat of Seawater = 3850 joules per kg per °C

     x 3.7 x 1019 kg = 1.4 x 1023 joules per °C in ocean surface

Mass of Atmosphere = 5.15 x 1018 kg

Specific Heat of Air = 1,000 joules per kg per °C

     1°C x 1,000 x 5.15 x 1018 kg = 5.15 x 1021 joules in air

5.15 x 1021 joules in air ÷ 1.4 x 1023 joules in water per °C = 0.037°C (to 100 meters depth)

Total ocean: 1.35x1021 kg x 3850 joules per kg per °C = 5.20 x 1024 joules per °C

5.15 x 1021 joules in air ÷ 5.20 x 1024 joules in ocean per °C = 0.001°C (total ocean water)
 

Claims Of Ocean Heating

About ten years ago, various claims began to be made on oceans heating due to global warming. At first, someone said, about 20 or 30% of the heating of global warming due to greenhouse gases goes into the oceans. Then someone said, about half of the heating goes into the oceans. Then someone said, about 90% of the heating goes into the oceans. Now the claim is that 90% is the agreed upon fact, and new measurements indicate that it is a large amount.

The foundation of this subject is radiative transfer equations published in 1998. They do not allow any modified assumptions of heat going into the oceans. Radiative transfer equations form the basis of all claims for the amount of heat cabon dioxide adds to the atmosphere. The equations were said to have only 1% error in 1998. Any variation throws out the foundations of the subject and claims of knowing how much heat CO2 adds to the atmosphere.

It is not clear what was done in 1998 due to the lack of scientific standards of such publishing. Modeling was said to be added to the study. No explanation of what was modeled or how was published. The purpose of the claim of modeling was to indicate that all environmental variations were accounted for. No one can account for environmental variations with 1% error. There was no indication of how much heat was entering the oceans or how it was accounted for.

This situation is a result of incompetents contriving fake science with no standards of integrity attempting to make themselves lords of science through corruption. Considering that there is no such thing as a greenhouse gas trapping heat, there is nothing to measure; it's all contrivance.

Oceans have been warming more than expected over the past few years. One explanation given is that volcanoes on the ocean floor might be the cause. I think a more logical explanation is that solar intensity is increasing. Solar energy gets trapped in the oceans and does not easily escape. So warming oceans point to increased solar energy. The best explanation for the "medieval warm period" and "little ice age" is variations in solar intensity, which indicates that variations are common in solar intensity.

90% Going Into The Oceans Is Irrelevant

Even if 90% of the heating caused by carbon dioxide went into the oceans, 100 meters of the ocean's surface would increase 0.25°C instead of 0.025°C (a factor of ten), which is still irrelevant. And 100 meters of the ocean's surface is more shallow than mixing would allow.

If the heating were mixed throughout the whole ocean, the heating would be 0.00068°C.

It means the attempt to rationalize with 90% of the heat going into the oceans does not fix the fraud of oceans heating and arctic ice melting due to carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.

But there is no such thing as 90% of the heating caused by CO2 in the atmosphere going into the oceans. Continuous radiation goes equally in all directions, while the oceans are only downward and 70% of the earth's surface.

In other words, the claim that 90% of heating going into the oceans is rationalistic, nonscientific garbage with no relationship to objective reality. It's reducing science to made up numbers to justify fraud in conflict with the science of the subject.
 
Back Radiation

The sometimes claim (there is never agreement without objective reality) is that back radiation is what does the heating. Then, the heat of the atmosphere doesn't move into the oceans; it radiates continuously into the oceans. There is no way to get 90% out of back radiation, because half of the radiation goes upwards.

Radiation is evaluated with the Stefan-Boltzmann constant as watts per square meter radiation given off at some temperature. But the Stefan-Boltzmann constant shows about 40 times too much radiation at the earth's average temperature of 15°C; so trying to use it for analysis is folly.

A variation of the analysis would be that the claimed 3.7 W/m² which supposedly creates 1°C atmospheric heating would be reduced in half as back radiation causing the oceans to heat at a rate of 1.85 W/m². But the 3.7 W/m² are a product of radiative transfer equations which are totally contrived with no relationship to reality.

As calculated above, the heat capacity of the oceans is 1006 times that of the atmosphere; and the top 100 meters of the oceans (2.7%) has a heat capacity of 27 times that of the atmosphere. Therefore, if the atmosphere has been heated 1°C through radiation, as claimed, there can be no more than half as much radiation going into a mass that has 27 times as much heat capacity. Dividing the 1°C by half and by 27 means the top 100 meters of the oceans could only be heated 0.019°C.

Even though there are two different types of radiation involved (fingerprint radiation absorbed by CO2 and black body radiation emitted by CO2, the amount of energy re-emitted must be the same as absorbed.

Since energy cannot be created or destroyed, there cannot be more than half the energy going into CO2 going into the oceans. When back radiation is the concern, a dynamic (continuous) system exists (non-trapping, non-greenhouse) where proportionalities must be maintained; meaning, the amount of radiation going into CO2 is the amount that goes out of CO2 with half going into the oceans (on a square foot basis).

While a certain amount of radiation will not do the same thing in the oceans as in the atmosphere, the claimed 1°C heating of the atmosphere is not a real concept. The actual heating in the atmosphere is trillionths of a degree. So one half as much radiation going into the oceans would result in trillionths of a degree, though not the same trillionths of a degree.